# 10.EMA Guideline on the investigation of drug interactions_201207

## Page 1

30 Churchill Place ● Canary Wharf ● London E14 5EU ● United Kingdom
An agency of the European Union

Telephone +44 (0)20 3660 6000 Facsimile +44 (0)20 3660 5555
Send a question via our website www.ema.europa.eu/contact

© European Medicines Agency, 2015. Reproduction is authorised provided the source is acknowledged.

21 June 2012
CPMP/EWP/560/95/Rev. 1 Corr. 2**
Committee for Human Medicinal Products (CHMP)
Guideline on the investigation of drug interactions

Discussion in the Efficacy Working Party (EWP) June/October 1996
February 1997
Transmission to the CPMP March 1997
Transmission to interested parties March 1997
Deadline for comments September 1997
Re-submission to the EWP December 1997
Approval by the CPMP December 1997
Date for coming into operation June 1998
Draft Rev. 1 Agreed by the EWP  April 2010
Adoption Rev. 1 by CHMP for release for consultation 22 April 2010
End of consultation Rev. 1 (deadline for comments) 31 October 2010
Agreed by Pharmacokinetics Working Party  February 2012
Adopted by CHMP 21 June 2012
Date for coming into effect 1 January 2013

This guideline replaces guideline CPMP/EWP/560/95.
Keywords Interaction, guideline, metabolism, inhibition, induction, transport,
enzyme, transport protein, transporter, absorption, food, distribution,
PBPK, herbal, SmPC
* The correction concerns section 5.3.4.1 (p 26) and the corresponding decision tree no. 6 (p 61) to read “if the
observed Ki value is lower or equal to /…/”; Appendix VII, Table 5 to read “See section 5.4.2”.* Decision tree 4.

## Page 2

Guideline on the investigation of drug interactions
CPMP/EWP/560/95/Rev. 1 Corr. 2** Page 2/59

Guideline on the investigation of drug interactions
Table of contents
Executive summary ..................................................................................... 4
1. Introduction ............................................................................................ 4
2. Scope....................................................................................................... 5
3. Legal basis and relevant guidelines ......................................................... 5
4. Pharmacodynamic interactions................................................................ 6
5. Pharmacokinetic interactions .................................................................. 6
5.1. Effects of food intake on the pharmacokinetics of the investigational drug ................... 7
5.2. Effects of other medicinal products on the pharmacokinetics of the investigational drug 8
5.2.1. Absorption ........................................................................................................ 8
5.2.2. Distribution ....................................................................................................... 9
5.2.3. Metabolism ..................................................................................................... 10
5.2.4. Active uptake and secretion in drug elimination ................................................... 12
5.2.5. Special populations .......................................................................................... 14
5.3. Effects of the investigational drug on the pharmacokinetics of other drugs ................ 15
5.3.1. Absorption ...................................................................................................... 15
5.3.2. Distribution ..................................................................................................... 15
5.3.3. Metabolism ..................................................................................................... 15
5.3.4. Transport ....................................................................................................... 25
5.4. Design of in vivo studies ..................................................................................... 26
5.4.1. Study population ............................................................................................. 27
5.4.2. Probe drugs and cocktail studies ........................................................................ 27
5.4.3. Dose, formulation and time of administration ...................................................... 28
5.4.4. Time dependencies .......................................................................................... 30
5.4.5. Active metabolites ........................................................................................... 30
5.4.6. Pharmacokinetic parameters ............................................................................. 31
5.4.7. Population pharmacokinetic analysis .................................................................. 31
5.5. PBPK modelling and simulation ............................................................................ 32
5.6. Presentation of in vivo study results in the study report .......................................... 33
5.7. Translation into treatment recommendations ......................................................... 33
5.7.1. In vitro data ................................................................................................... 33
5.7.2. In vivo effects of other drugs on the investigational drug ...................................... 34
5.7.3. In vivo effects of the investigational drug on other drugs ...................................... 35
5.7.4. Food effects .................................................................................................... 36
6. Herbal medicinal products and specific food products ........................... 36
7. Inclusion of information and recommendations in the  SmPC .............. 36
7.1. Mechanistic information and prediction of non-studied interactions ........................... 37
7.2. Presentation of study results in the SmPC ............................................................. 38

## Page 3

Guideline on the investigation of drug interactions
CPMP/EWP/560/95/Rev. 1 Corr. 2** Page 3/59

Definitions ................................................................................................. 38
Appendix I ................................................................................................. 40
Appendix II ............................................................................................... 41
Appendix III .............................................................................................. 43
Appendix IV ............................................................................................... 44
Appendix V ................................................................................................ 46
Appendix VI ............................................................................................... 48
Appendix VII ............................................................................................. 49
Appendix VIII............................................................................................ 51
Appendix IX ............................................................................................... 52
Appendix X ................................................................................................ 53

## Page 4

Guideline on the investigation of drug interactions
CPMP/EWP/560/95/Rev. 1 Corr. 2** Page 4/59

Executive summary
The potential for pharmacokinetic interactions between new medicinal products and already marketed
drugs should be evaluated. This applies to both effects of the medicinal product on other drugs as well
as the effect of other drugs on the medicinal product. Furthermore the effect of concomitant food
intake needs to be investigated. The drug-drug interaction potential is usually investigated through in
vitro studies followed by in vivo studies. The results of interaction studies are used to predict a number
of other interactions based on the mechanisms involved. Treatment recommendations are developed
based on the clinical relevance of the interactions and the possibility to make dose adjustments or
treatment monitoring. This document aims to provide recommendations on all these issues. General
recommendations are also provided for herbal medicinal products.
1.  Introduction
Drug-drug interactions are a common problem during drug treatment and give rise to a large number
of hospital admissions as a result of medically important, sometimes serious or even fatal adverse
events. Drug-drug interactions can also cause partial or complete abolishment of treatment efficacy.
The ageing European population, where polypharmacy is more frequent, increases the likelihood of
such interactions and underlines the importance of a scientifically sound understanding of the potential
for drug-drug interactions for all new chemical entities. A number of drugs have been withdrawn from
the market as a result of drug-drug interactions that were only discovered post-marketing. The
potential for drug-drug interactions is considered in the benefit-risk evaluation of a medicinal product
and can negatively impact on this balance either through increased incidence of adverse events or
reduced efficacy.
This guideline outlines a comprehensive, systematic and mechanistic approach to the evaluation of the
interaction potential of a drug during its development and offers guidance to ensure that the prescriber
receives clear information on the interaction potential as well as practical recommendations on how the
interactions should be managed during clinical use.
The first CHMP interaction guideline was adopted in 1997 and this is the first revision of this guideline.
During the past 20 years, considerable scientific progress has been made so that today clinically
relevant pharmacokinetic drug interactions can be predicted from a limited number of well designed,
mechanistically-based in vitro and in vivo studies. More recently, our understanding of enzyme
induction and drug transporter-interactions has progressed so that these interactions can also be
anticipated. In vitro in vivo extrapolation of drug transporter interaction is currently less mature and
requires additional experience and continued scientific developments. Thus, the approach defined for
drug-transporter interactions is likely to continue to evolve.
The aim of the interaction studies performed on new medicinal products under development is to gain
knowledge of how the new medicinal product affects the safety and efficacy of other medicinal
products and vice versa. The potential for interactions is mainly investigated before marketing of a
drug. Knowledge about the interaction potential should be gained as early as practically possible to
assure safety during clinical phase II and III studies, as well as during clinical use after approval.
Additional studies may be needed post-approval to optimize drug safety and to support treatment
recommendations in the labeling and variation applications, e.g. for new indications or new dose
recommendations. There may also be a need to perform additional studies due to emerging science or
as a result of suspected drug interactions reported post marketing. The marketing authorization holder
is advised to perform and report interaction studies as needed during the full life-cycle of the medicinal
product.

## Page 5

Guideline on the investigation of drug interactions
CPMP/EWP/560/95/Rev. 1 Corr. 2** Page 5/59

This document provides recommendations on the pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic drug-drug
interaction studies as well as food-drug interaction studies to be conducted including advice on study
design, presentation of study results and translation of these results to treatment recommendations in
the labeling of the drug. General advice is also given for herbal medicinal products.
It is recognized that the program to adress the interaction potential of an individual drug needs to be
tailored to the specific drug. Alternative approaches are acceptable if adequately justified and driven by
science and the expected clinical consequence of the interaction.
2.  Scope
The scope of this guideline is to provide advice and recommendations on how to evaluate the potential
for drug-food and drug-drug interactions for medicinal products (including herbal medicinal products)
and how to translate the results of these evaluations to appropriate treatment recommendations in the
labelling.
Interactions with therapeutic proteins including peptides and oligunucleotides, pharmaceutical drug-
drug interactions related to physiochemical properties and impact of drugs on clinical chemical
laboratory tests are not discussed in this guideline.
3.  Legal basis and relevant guidelines
This guideline should be read in conjunction with the introduction and general principles (4) of the
Annex I to Directive 2001/83/EC as amended, as well as European and ICH guidelines for conducting
clinical trials, including:
- Pharmacokinetic studies in man (Eudralex vol 3C C3A)
- Guideline on the role of pharmacokinetics in the development of medicinal products in the
paediatric population (EMEA/CHMP/EWP/147013/2004)
- Guideline on the evaluation of the pharmacokinetics of medicinal products in patients with impaired
hepatic function (CPMP/EWP/2339/02)
- Note for guidance on the evaluation of the pharmacokinetics of medicinal products in patients with
impaired renal function (CHMP/EWP/225/02)
-  A guideline on summary of product characteristics (SmPC) September 2009(Eudralex vol 2C)
-  Guideline on reporting the results of population pharmacokinetic analyses
(EMEA/CHMP/EWP/185990/2006)
-  Guideline on the use of pharmacogenetic methodologies in the pharmacokinetic evaluation of
medicinal products. (EMA/CHMP/37646/2009)
 -  Guideline on the clinical investigation of the pharmacokinetics of therapeutic proteins
(EMEA/CHMP/89249/2004).
- Note for guidance on Modified Release Oral and Transdermal Dosage Forms: Section 2
(Pharmacokinetic and Clinical Evaluation) (CPMP/EWP/280/96)
-  Note for guidance on nonclinical safety studies for the conduct of human clinical trials and
marketing authorization for pharmaceuticals ICH M3, CPMP/ICH/286/95
-  Note for Guidance on General Considerations for Clinical Trials (ICH E8, CPMP/ICH/291/95)

## Page 6

Guideline on the investigation of drug interactions
CPMP/EWP/560/95/Rev. 1 Corr. 2** Page 6/59

-  Note for Guidance on Guideline for Good Clinical Practice (ICH E6, CPMP/ICH/135/95)
-  Structure and Contents on Clinical Study Reports (ICH E3, CPMP/ICH/137/95)
4.  Pharmacodynamic interactions
Pharmacodynamic interactions may be caused by a large variety of mechanisms. It is therefore not
possible to give detailed guidance for pharmacodynamic interaction studies. The studies needed should
be determined on a case-by-case basis. The potential for pharmacodynamic interactions should be
considered for drugs which compete with each other at the pharmacological target and/or have similar
or opposing pharmacodynamic (therapeutic or adverse) effects. If such drugs are likely to be used
concomitantly, pharmacodynamic interaction studies should be considered. Extensive pharmacological
and toxicological knowledge about the drug is important for the planning of pharmacodynamic
interaction studies. It is recommended that both in vitro studies and human in vivo studies are used to
characterize the pharmacodynamic interaction profile.
5.  Pharmacokinetic interactions
Pharmacokinetic interaction studies should generally be performed in humans. Preclinical studies in
animals may sometimes be relevant, but due to the marked species differences, direct extrapolation of
such results to humans is difficult. Therefore, the wording in vivo below means in humans. Similarly in
vitro studies should be performed using human enzymes and transporters. Deviations from this
approach should be well justified and supported by scientific literature.
Potential for pharmacokinetic interactions should be investigated both with respect to the effects of
other drugs on the investigational drug and the effects of the investigational drug on other medicinal
products. As the study designs and considerations are different, this section is divided into two
subsections: “Effects of other medicinal products on the pharmacokinetics of the investigational drug”
(section 5.2) and “Effects of the investigational drug on the pharmacokinetics of other drugs” (section
5.3). The wording “investigational drug” is here used for the drug developed by the marketing
authorisation applicant or holder reading this document. Sometimes the expressions “victim drug” and
“perpetrator drug” are used. The victim drug is the drug affected by the drug-drug interaction,
regardless of whether it is the investigational drug or another medicinal product. The perpetrator drug
is the drug which affects the pharmacokinetics of the other drug.
Although not mentioned in every subsection of this document, the effects of other medicinal products
on the exposure of clinically relevant pharmacologically active metabolites should always be considered.
The risk of clinically relevant pharmacokinetic interactions through altered formation or elimination of
metabolites should be investigated if available data indicate that an altered metabolite exposure may
result in an altered efficacy or safety (“target” as well as “off-target” effects) in vivo (see section 5.2.3).
The contribution of metabolites to the in vivo pharmacological effects of a drug is evaluated taking into
account human unbound drug and metabolite exposures in vivo, the in vitro or in vivo pharmacological
activities and potencies, and, if available, physiochemical data related to target tissue distribution or
data on relative parent drug and metabolite distribution to the target site. Human in vivo exposure-
response information on metabolite contribution is usually very valuable when translating altered
metabolite exposure into treatment recommendations. Finally, as metabolites may inhibit drug
metabolising enzymes, the effect of metabolites with a moderate to high exposure should be
investigated (see section 5.3.3).
Drug interaction studies required during drug development have a mechanistic rationale. Usually, the
potential for drug interactions is investigated in vitro and then followed by in vivo studies. The in vivo
part of the interaction documentation is usually composed of a number of interaction studies, some of

## Page 7

Guideline on the investigation of drug interactions
CPMP/EWP/560/95/Rev. 1 Corr. 2** Page 7/59

these are purely mechanistic, such as studies with strong and moderate inhibitors of an enzyme
involved in drug metabolism, aiming at providing the basis for further interaction predictions. Other
studies may be performed with likely interacting drugs expected to be commonly used concomitantly
with the investigational drug aiming to obtain a specific dose recommendation. Studies may also be
performed in order to verify the suitability of a proposed dose adjustment or to confirm a lack of
interaction with a commonly co-prescribed drug in the target population. PBPK (Physiologically based
pharmacokinetic) modelling and simulation may be used at different stages during drug development
to inform study design, to estimate the potential for drug-interactions qualitatively as well as estimate
an interaction effect quantitatively. The supporting data needed in different scenarios are presented in
different subsections of the guideline.
If an investigational drug is developed for use in combination with another drug, the drug interaction
potential for the combination should be addressed. Pharmacokinetic interaction studies with the
combination should be considered if there are indications that the interaction profile may not be
adequately predicted from in vitro and in vivo interaction data for the separate drugs.
The recommendations in this guideline are based on advances in scientific knowledge resulting in the
fact that most drug-drug interaction can be predicted. However, it is acknowledged that there are
remaining scientific uncertainties. In the area of HIV there have been cases of unexpected interactions.
When developing a drug in such an area, in vivo interaction studies should be considered with
commonly combined drugs having a relatively narrow therapeutic window while more knowledge is
gained on the mechanism behind the unsuspected interactions in the field.
5.1.  Effects of food intake on the pharmacokinetics of the investigational
drug
The effect of food intake on the rate and extent of absorption of an orally administered investigational
drug should be investigated as early as possible during drug development to optimize dose finding and
to ensure optimal food recommendations in the phase III clinical studies and drug labelling. In general,
recommendations regarding timing of drug intake in relation to food should aim at minimising
variability and obtaining optimal exposure.
If the formulation is modified during the clinical development or if a new pharmaceutical form is
developed, the possibility of an altered food effect should be considered and additional food interaction
studies may be needed.
The effect of a high-fat meal on the absorption of the investigational drug should be investigated as
worst-case scenario. The standardized procedure is presented in Appendix I. If the pharmacokinetics
are nonlinear with less than dose-proportional increases in AUC when increasing the dose, it is
recommended to investigate the effect of food on the highest and lowest doses of the therapeutic
range. If the nonlinearity give rise to larger than dose-proportional increases, studying the dose giving
rise to the most marked saturation, usually the highest dose, may be sufficient.
Regardless of dose-linearity, further strength(s) may need to be investigated in case the strengths
deviate markedly in composition, the substance has poor solubility under GI conditions and a food
effect has been observed on other strengths.
If a clinically significant effect of food is found and the medicinal product therefore will have a specific
recommendation regarding time of administration in relation to food-intake, further food-drug
interaction studies are recommended. Which studies are relevant to perform depends on whether fed
conditions or fasting conditions will be recommended and on how frequently the drug will be
administered. If the drug will be recommended to be taken with a meal, studies of the effects of a
moderate meal are recommended (See Appendix I) and it may be useful to also investigate different

## Page 8

Guideline on the investigation of drug interactions
CPMP/EWP/560/95/Rev. 1 Corr. 2** Page 8/59

food compositions (such as a carbohydrate-rich meal). If administration is recommended under fasting
conditions in the morning, studies should be performed establishing the sufficient fasting time period
between drug administration and the intended meal. If the drug will be dosed on an empty stomach,
either several times a day or at a time point other than the morning, studies should be performed
establishing the time interval before and after a meal when drug administration should be avoided.
If physiochemical properties and in vitro data indicate that complex binding might become an issue in
vivo, the need for a food interaction study with a calcium-rich meal should be considered. If co-
administration is recommended with a meal or specific food due to a marked effect of food on the
pharmacokinetics, and the formulation is indicated for the paediatric population, it should be addressed
whether this is relevant for paediatric use (especially newborns and infants) whose diet is different
(100 % milk in newborns). In newborns, this may be investigated using the population PK approach.
Recommendations regarding interaction studies with special kind of foods (e.g. grapefruit juice) are
given in section 6.
Advice regarding the investigation of the effect of food or alcohol on drug release from controlled
release formulations are given in guidelines specific for these formulations.
5.2.  Effects of other medicinal products on the pharmacokinetics of the
investigational drug
In vitro information supporting the prediction of the effects by other medicinal products on the
pharmacokinetics of the investigational drug should preferably be available before introducing the
investigational product to patients (phase II) and is generally required before starting phase III. The
extent of data (in vitro or in vivo data) needed at different stages of the clinical drug-development is
decided case by case based on the possibility of excluding potentially interacting medicines (such as
strong enzyme inhibitors) giving rise to relevant interactions, the pharmacokinetic characteristics of
the investigational drug, and the safety of the drug at exposures higher than the target exposure in
the planned study. PBPK simulations may be of value in the DDI assessment at different stages in drug
development (See section 5.5)
Interactions at the level of absorption, distribution and elimination should be considered. If a marked
interaction is observed in vivo and the mechanism is not clear, further studies in vitro and in vivo are
recommended to clarify the mechanism of the interaction and to enable the prediction of further
interactions with the same or related mechanisms.
5.2.1.  Absorption
The investigation of absorption interactions serves to identify situations where the solubility,
dissolution or absorption of a drug is altered by extrinsic factors. Studies of the effect of increased
gastrointestinal pH, complex binding, and modified intestinal active transport should be considered. In
some cases, drugs modulating gastric emptying and intestinal motility may be of importance. Which
studies are needed for a specific medicinal product depend on the mode of administration,
bioavailability of the medicinal product and the physicochemical properties of the investigational drug.
Interactions at absorption level should be investigated mainly for orally administered investigational
drugs and the text below refers to orally administered formulations. However, interactions should be
considered also for inhaled and nasally administered products with potential for oral absorption.
A.  Interactions affecting solubility
If the solubility of the drug or the dissolution of the formulation is markedly pH dependent in the
physiological pH range, the potential effect of drugs which increase gastric pH, such as proton pump

## Page 9

Guideline on the investigation of drug interactions
CPMP/EWP/560/95/Rev. 1 Corr. 2** Page 9/59

inhibitors, H2-receptor antagonists or antacids, should be investigated in vivo. If indicated by the
physicochemical properties of the drug, it may be necessary to investigate the potential for complex
binding in vitro and an in vivo study could be considered.
B. Interactions affecting intestinal active transport
Involvement of transport proteins (transporters) in drug absorption is evaluated to enable predictions
of interactions where the absorption of the drug is altered due to inhibition or induction of these
proteins. Inhibition or absence of an intestinal uptake transporter can result in decreased systemic
drug exposure and/or lower Cmax. Inhibition of an intestinal efflux transporter may result in increased
systemic drug exposure and/or increased Cmax either due to a primary increase in absorption and/or,
secondarily, due to decreased availability of drug to intestinal drug metabolising enzymes (e.g. CYP3A).
It is recommended that the involvement of transporters in drug absorption is evaluated in vitro in
Caco-2 cells. To evaluate the importance of active transport for drug absorption, the permeability of
the investigational drug should be taken into account. If the in vitro transport and permeability data
indicate that active intestinal transport may affect the bioavailability of the new drug, attempts should
be made to identify the transporter involved in vitro. Detailed recommendations on how to study
intestinal transporter involvement and to determine the apparent permeability constant in vitro is
given in appendices II and III.
When a candidate transporter has been identified, and interactions through inhibition are likely to be
clinically relevant, an in vivo study with a strong inhibitor is recommended if known inhibitors are
registered as medicinal products in the EU. If the candidate transporter is subject to genetic
polymorphism, in vivo studies in subjects of certain genotypes giving rise to markedly altered
expression or activity of the transporter may be useful for investigating the involvement of the
transporter in vivo and the estimation of the potential for pharmacokinetic interactions via inhibition
(or induction) of the transporter.
5.2.2.  Distribution
Interactions affecting distribution include interactions through modulation of active uptake or efflux
transport of the drug, as well as displacement interactions. Distribution interactions due to an
alteration in drug transport may not be fully reflected by changes in plasma concentrations alone.
Therefore, the inclusion of pharmacodynamic markers to reflect altered distribution to the organs
expressing the transporter should be considered whenever possible.
A. Distribution interactions due to altered transport
Little is presently known regarding distribution interactions due to transporter inhibition. Interactions
at a transport protein level are expected to give rise to altered distribution of drug to organs where
these transporters are expressed. If the investigational drug is a substrate for transport proteins, the
potential for clinically relevant distribution interactions should be discussed in light of any available
data on the tissue specific expression or in vivo importance of the transporter in the particular organ,
data on permeability, data on distribution in preclinical species taking potential species differences into
account, available clinical safety data in patients with reduced transport caused by genetic
polymorphism or interactions, as well as the expected clinical consequences of an altered distribution.
If indicated and feasible, in vivo studies investigating the effect of transporter inhibition on the
pharmacokinetics as well as pharmacodynamics (including PD markers for the potential effect on the
transporter expressing organ) are recommended. Distribution imaging techniques could be considered.
Both target organs for the clinical effect and potential target organs for safety should be considered. As
an example, inhibition of transporter mediated efflux of a hepatotoxic drug from the liver could in

## Page 10

Guideline on the investigation of drug interactions
CPMP/EWP/560/95/Rev. 1 Corr. 2** Page 10/59

theory give rise to increased hepatocyte drug exposure and therefore increase the frequency of
concentration-dependent hepatotoxicity.
If the transporter potentially controlling target tissue exposure is subject to marked genetic
polymorphism, investigations of the effect of a genotype giving rise to reduced transporter activity on
the target organ safety (or efficacy if relevant) in phase III trials could indicate the consequences of
transporter inhibition by a concomitant drug.
B. Displacement interactions
In general, the risk of clinically relevant interactions via displacement from plasma protein binding
sites is low. Nevertheless, the possibility of displacement interactions of drugs known to be markedly
protein bound should be considered. This may be of particular importance for highly bound drugs
(arbitrary fu<1%) having a narrow therapeutic window, a high hepatic extraction ratio (if administered
i.v), or a high renal extraction ratio. If indicated, the risk of interaction should be addressed by in vitro
displacement studies using therapeutically relevant concentrations. If a clinically relevant interaction is
suspected, an in vivo study could be performed. Unbound concentrations should be determined in such
a study.
5.2.3.  Metabolism
Investigations of how the metabolism of the investigational drug is affected by other drugs, usually
include studies of how the investigational drug is eliminated as well as which enzymes are catalysing
the main systemic and pre-systemic elimination pathways. Main enzymes catalysing the main
pathways of formation and further elimination of pharmacologically active metabolites also need
consideration.
In vitro metabolism studies should generally be performed before starting phase I to identify the main
metabolites formed in vitro. These studies provide information necessary for the extrapolation of
preclinical safety data to man and also allow for early screening of main metabolites found in vitro for
target pharmacological activity.
In vitro studies should also be performed to identify candidate enzymes responsible for the main
metabolic pathways of the parent drug. Guidance on the in vitro investigations of which enzymes are
involved in the metabolism is given in Appendix IV.
The mass-balance study (See Appendix V), in which unchanged drug and metabolites are followed
after administration of radiolabelled drug, provides information on systemic metabolite exposure as
well as data used to estimate the main elimination pathways. The results of the mass-balance study
should generally be available before starting phase III. These data are then combined with the in vitro
information on which enzymes are mainly responsible for catalysing different reactions. The in vivo
involvement of enzymes found in vitro to catalyse relevant metabolism pathways, should be confirmed
and quantified. This may be done through an interaction study with a potent selective inhibitor of the
enzyme (See Appendix VI) or by pharmacogenetic studies if the enzyme is subject to genetic
polymorphism. If the in vivo results do not support major involvement of the candidate enzyme,
additional in vitro and in vivo studies are needed to identify the enzyme involved.
In general, enzymes involved in metabolic pathways estimated to contribute to ≥ 25% of drug
elimination should be identified if possible and the in vivo contribution quantified. This applies to
cytochrome P450 (CYP) enzymes and non-CYP enzymes.
Similarly, if there are pharmacologically active metabolites estimated based on unbound systemic
exposure whose in vitro activity contributes to ≥ 50% of the in vivo target pharmacological effect,
enzymes contributing to main formation and elimination pathways of these metabolites should  be

## Page 11

Guideline on the investigation of drug interactions
CPMP/EWP/560/95/Rev. 1 Corr. 2** Page 11/59

identified. If the protein binding of parent and metabolite(s) is high, it is recommended to determine
the protein binding in the same study so as not to introduce inter-study variability. The fraction of the
formation and elimination that needs to be characterised for enzyme involvement depends on how
much the metabolite contributes to the in vivo target effect. As a general guidance, 50% of the
elimination of a metabolite estimated to contribute 50% of the target effect may be used. If the
investigational drug is a pro-drug acting through one pharmacologically active metabolite, enzymes
estimated to contribute to 25% of the formation and elimination of the active metabolite should if
possible be identified. If there are metabolites in man which are suspected to cause adverse effects
based on available nonclinical, or clinical information, major enzymes involved in formation and
elimination pathways of these metabolites should also if possible be identified. It is also recommended
that such metabolites are measured in the in vivo interaction studies.
Identification of enzymes involved in minor pathways may be needed if these pathways have a marked
importance in some subpopulations due to intrinsic or extrinsic factors (see section 5.2.5). In addition,
there may be situations where several drugs have in vivo co-inhibitory potential of two specific proteins
involved in the elimination of the investigational drug, such as CYP3A inhibitors that also inhibit Pgp
mediated renal or biliary excretion. In these cases an interaction study with a drug that is a strong
inhibitor of both pathways may be needed. An evaluation of the effect of strong inducers of the
involved proteins on the pharmacokinetics of the investigational drug may also be required (see below).
A) Interaction studies with inhibitors of cytochrome P450 enzymes
If cytochrome P450 enzymes are identified as candidate enzymes involved in the main elimination
pathways of the drug (or in major formation or elimination pathways of clinically relevant active
metabolites), evaluation of the pharmacokinetics of the investigational drug with and without
concomitant administration of a strong enzyme inhibitor (see Appendices IV and V) is recommended to
verify and quantify the involvement of a specific enzyme in the investigational drug elimination. If
possible the inhibitor should be specific, not affecting any other enzyme or transporter involved in the
elimination of the drug. For more information on design issues see section 5.4. If there are metabolites
known to contribute to the efficacy and/or safety of the investigational drug, the effect on the exposure
of these metabolites should be investigated in the in vivo study. However, it is also recommended to
measure the concentrations of metabolites which may influence efficacy or safety if their exposure is
increased.
If the interaction study with the strong inhibitor results in a marked effect on the exposure of the
investigational drug, potentially leading to dose adjustments, contraindications or other specific
treatment recommendations, an additional study with a moderate inhibitor of the enzyme is
recommended in order to support the evaluation of the need for specific treatment recommendations
for other inhibitors of the enzyme. Alternatively, if a high precision of the interaction effect estimate is
not needed, PBPK simulations of the effect of moderate inhibition could be used to support a general
labelling statement valid for moderate inhibitors. In this case, the results of the interaction study with
a strong inhibitor should be quantitatively well predicted by the model used. Additionally, results of an
in vivo drug interaction study with a moderate inhibitor and a probe drug for the specific enzyme
should be well predicted by the model (see also section 5.5.)
If the candidate enzyme is a cytochrome P450 enzyme which is relatively little studied and generally
not included in the enzyme inhibition screening of drugs, there may be little information on strong and
moderate inhibitors of that particular enzyme. In this case, in vitro studies should be considered to
investigate the inhibitory effect of commonly co-administered drugs on that particular enzyme. The
need for such studies is dependent on the safety at supra-therapeutic drug exposures as well as the
contribution of the catalysed pathway to drug elimination.
B) Interaction studies with inhibitors of non-cytochrome P450 enzymes

## Page 12

Guideline on the investigation of drug interactions
CPMP/EWP/560/95/Rev. 1 Corr. 2** Page 12/59

If the investigational drug is metabolised by non-cytochrome P450 enzymes, it is recommended to, if
possible, verify the contribution of the candidate enzyme in vivo through either in vivo drug interaction
studies with potent inhibitors or studies in subjects of a “poor metaboliser” genotype. The potential for
drug interactions should be discussed in light of published literature. If possible, potentially clinically
relevant interactions should be investigated in accordance with the recommendations for drugs
metabolised by cytochrome P450 enzymes.
C) Interaction studies with inducers
The effect of enzyme inducers on the pharmacokinetics of the investigational drug also needs
consideration. If the drug is eliminated through metabolism mainly catalysed by one or more inducible
enzymes, or if elimination is catalysed by CYP3A only to a limited extent, an interaction study with a
potent inducer is recommended. This also applies to situations where it may not be excluded that
enzyme induction will affect drug exposure to a clinically relevant extent, such as drugs mainly
eliminated through secretion by inducible transport proteins. However, an interaction study is not
necessary if the effects are highly predictable, such as the effect of rifampicin on a drug mainly
eliminated through CYP3A catalysed metabolism, and likely to result in a contraindication. The need to
investigate the effect on exposures of pharmacologically active metabolites (target or off-target
pharmacological effects) should be considered. If there are metabolites known to contribute to the
efficacy and/or safety of the investigational drug, the effect on the exposure of these metabolites
should be investigated in the in vivo study. However, it is also recommended to measure the
concentrations of metabolites which may influence efficacy or safety if their concentrations are
markedly increased.
If concomitant treatment with a specific enzyme inducer is likely to be common and clinically needed,
an in vivo study investigating the interaction with that particular inducer is recommended in order to
establish adequate treatment recommendations. The time dependency of the induction needs to be
considered in the study design (see section 5.4). If a dose adjustment is needed based on the study
results, the need for a study using the proposed regimen should be considered. This is mainly
applicable when there is a two-way (mutual) interaction, or when the dose of the inducer is adjusted.
In studies of the effects of potent inducers on an investigational drug, rifampicin is often chosen due to
its potency. As rifampicin also inhibits the hepatic uptake transporter OATP1B1, the day(s) of blood
sampling for the investigational drug should be carefully chosen if the investigational drug is
transported by the inhibited protein. Different sampling days should be considered depending on the
aim of the study. If the study aims at forming a basis for rifampicin co-therapy per se based on the net
effect of transporter inhibition and the general induction, sampling for the concentrations of the
investigational drug should be performed during rifampicin treatment. However, if the aim is to
illustrate the effect of potent enzyme inducers, and thus to extrapolate the effect to other inducers,
sampling for the investigational drug is optimally performed one day after the last rifampicin dose.
5.2.4.  Active uptake and secretion in drug elimination
Information on transporters involved in major elimination processes should be gained as early as
possible during drug development. The need for data at different phases is driven by the predicted
magnitude of the exposure increase if the transporter is inhibited and the clinical consequences of such
an increase. In vitro data may be sufficient before phase III provided use of potentially significantly
interacting drugs may be restricted in the study protocol.
Inhibition of OATPs has been reported to result in marked increases in the systemic exposure of drugs
subject to hepatic uptake transport by members of this subfamily, and involvement of these
transporters may be present without any indications from the in vivo pharmacokinetic information.

## Page 13

Guideline on the investigation of drug interactions
CPMP/EWP/560/95/Rev. 1 Corr. 2** Page 13/59

Therefore, the possible involvement of OATP1B1 and 1B3 uptake transport should be investigated in
vitro for drugs estimated to have ≥ 25% hepatic elimination (clearance by hepatic metabolism and
biliary secretion together contributing to ≥ 25%). As scientific knowledge evolves, other hepatic
uptake transporters may need screening if their inhibition generally has been observed to lead to large
effects on drug elimination.
Investigations of transporters involved in drug elimination are indicated if available in vivo data shows
that active renal, biliary or gut wall secretion of unchanged drug is involved in a main part of the drug
elimination and thus modulation of the transporter involved may be of clinical relevance. In line with
the requirements for enzyme identification, if renal secretion or biliary/gut wall secretion separately is
estimated to account for more than 25% of drug elimination, attempts should be made to identify the
transporter(s) involved in the active secretion. The importance of renal secretion is estimated by
comparing total renal clearance to the renal filtration clearance (GFR*fu). Depending on the
information at hand, it may be difficult to estimate the quantitative importance of biliary and gut wall
secretion to total elimination. The importance of biliary/gut wall secretion should be based on the mass
balance data supported by available interaction data, potential pharmacogenetic information, data in
patients with hepatic impairment, data on Caco-2 cell permeability (if absolute bioavailability is
unknown), etc. (See Appendix V). An i.v. mass balance study can provide important information in
quantifying the importance of biliary/gut wall secretion of orally administered drugs. Data on absolute
bioavailability may also inform the estimation of the extent of elimination through these elimination
routes. Thus, if a large fraction of an oral dose is recovered as unchanged drug in faeces, an i.v. mass-
balance study or an absolute bioavailability study is of great value and should be considered.
In line with requirements for enzyme involvement, if active secretion is the major elimination pathway
of a metabolite with significant target activity (estimated contribution to in vivo pharmacological effect
≥50% of total effect) attempts should be made to identify the transporter(s) involved. The need to
investigate transporter involvement in renal or biliary/gut wall excretion of metabolite should also be
considered when available preclinical and clinical information indicate that the metabolite has a major
contribution to off-target (adverse) effects.
In vitro studies usually compose the first steps of the identification process. The in vitro studies are
further described in Appendix III. The transporters selected for in vitro investigation should be based
on available expression data of the transporter in the eliminating organ and, if possible, whether
uptake or efflux transporters or a combination are expected to be involved and be rate limiting for the
elimination process.
When a candidate transporter has been identified, an in vivo study with a strong inhibitor of the
transporter at the site of interest is recommended, if interactions through inhibition are likely to be
clinically relevant and if known inhibitors are marketed within the EU. In vivo studies in subjects of
certain genotypes giving rise to markedly reduced expression or activity of a certain transporter may
be useful to verify and quantify involvement of a certain transporter and may give an indication of the
pharmacokinetic consequences of transporter inhibition. However, quantitative extrapolation of such
data to drug interactions with inhibitors should be justified based on the published literature. As
transporter inhibition may alter drug distribution in parallel, inclusion of PD markers is encouraged in
the in vivo studies if relevant and possible.
Interactions with in vivo inhibitors should be predicted based on the acquired in vivo information and
the scientific literature. If there are commonly used drug combinations where an interaction is
expected, it is recommended to investigate the interaction in vivo. If there are inducers of the
transporter marketed within the EU, an interaction study with such an inducer is recommended. The
possible effect of transporter inhibition and induction on availability of the investigational drug for

## Page 14

Guideline on the investigation of drug interactions
CPMP/EWP/560/95/Rev. 1 Corr. 2** Page 14/59

metabolism (transporter-enzyme interplay), such as the interplay observed between Pgp and CYP3A,
should be discussed, and if needed, an in vivo study should be considered.
5.2.5.  Special populations
An interaction effect may not be directly extrapolated to specific subpopulations that have a markedly
different contribution of the affected enzyme and/or transporter to the clearance of the investigational
drug. Such subpopulations may include carriers of certain alleles coding for an enzyme or transporter
subject to genetic polymorphisms, patients with impaired renal function and young paediatric patients
(< 2 years). Patients treated with inhibitors of a major elimination pathway should also be considered.
The effect of a strong enzyme inhibitor on the exposure of an investigational drug is dependent on the
quantitative contribution of parallel elimination pathways. If the parallel pathway is renal excretion, the
interaction effect will be different in patients with reduced renal function. If the parallel pathway is
metabolism or biliary excretion, the effect of an interaction will be different in patients with reduced or
abolished activity of the enzyme or transporter involved in the pathway. In case the parallel pathway is
subject to genetic polymorphism, the interaction effect will be different in genetic subpopulations with
altered enzyme activity as compared to “wild type”.
Moreover, it should be considered that genetic subgroups may have a completely different set of drug
interactions. If a major enzyme (or transporter) for active substance elimination or formation is absent
or has very low activity in a subpopulation due  to genetic polymorphism, the enzymes (or transporters)
involved in the parallel pathways should be identified and their contribution quantified, as these
pathways will be the main elimination pathways in the genetic subpopulation.
When indicated, drug interactions relevant to the subpopulation should be investigated. An in vivo
study exploring the interaction in the subpopulation is recommended. In case a clinical study is not
possible, a worst case estimation of the effect on the active substance exposure may be performed.
It may also be acceptable to use PBPK simulations to predict the interaction effect in the subpopulation
if the simulation is qualified for this purpose. This includes an adequate prediction of the relative
contribution of enzymes to in vivo clearance. Thus, the results of potent inhibition (or polymorphism)
of the separate enzymes in vivo should be well predicted. Also the in vivo effect on an adequate probe
drug by the inhibitor chosen for the DDI PBPK simulation should be well predicted. PBPK simulations
may serve as a basis for treatment recommendations. However, specific dose recommendations may
need support by in vivo interaction data in the subpopulation.
If the investigational drug will mainly be used in elderly and an interaction study has been performed
in young subjects, the interaction effect may be different if the parallel pathway is renal excretion.
Dependent on the therapeutic window of the affected drug, the difference in interaction effect may
need to be estimated and reflected in the treatment recommendations.
If the medicinal product will have a paediatric indication, the possibility to extrapolate drug-drug
interaction results from adults to children should be discussed by the applicant. This is further
discussed in EMEA/CHMP/EWP/147013/2004 (Guideline on the role of pharmacokinetics in the
development of medicinal products in the paediatric population). An in vivo study should be considered
if a drug combination suspected or known to interact is common in the paediatric population and there
is a need for clear dosing recommendations. If an interaction study is needed, a sparse sampling and
population pharmacokinetic approach could be considered. The applicant is invited to find ways of
providing satisfactory supportive data, such as drug interaction simulations provided that the
simulations successfully quantify the observed interaction in adults and the data on enzyme abundance
and other physiological parameters in the paediatric population are reliable.

## Page 15

Guideline on the investigation of drug interactions
CPMP/EWP/560/95/Rev. 1 Corr. 2** Page 15/59

5.3.  Effects of the investigational drug on the pharmacokinetics of other
drugs
In vitro data on the effects of the investigational parent drug on the pharmacokinetics of other drugs
should preferably be available before starting phase II studies unless all concomitant drug treatments
at risk of being clinically relevantly affected can be avoided in these studies. The in vitro information
should be available before starting phase III. If in vitro data indicate that there may be a clinically
relevant interaction with a drug that cannot be safely managed by protocol restrictions in the phase II
or III studies, it is recommended to perform in vivo interaction studies with these drugs prior to phase
II or III. Depending on how precise the interaction effect needs to be estimated, PBPK simulations may
inform the phase II or III study protocol (see section 5.5). Investigational drugs which exhibit dose-
dependent- pharmacokinetics in the therapeutic dose/concentration-range, unrelated to dissolution or
protein binding, are likely to inhibit an enzyme or transporter. Likewise, if a drug exhibits time-
dependent pharmacokinetics, it is likely to be an inducer or mechanism-based inhibitor. (The time-
dependency may also be caused by a metabolite.) The mechanism of the non-linearity should therefore,
if possible, be identified. Also, if an interaction is observed in vivo and the mechanism is not clear,
further studies in vitro and in vivo are recommended to clarify the mechanism of the interaction and to
enable prediction of related interactions.
5.3.1.  Absorption
If there are indications that the investigational drug affects gastric emptying or intestinal motility, it
may affect the rate and extent of absorption of other drugs. This mainly affects drugs with a narrow
therapeutic window, modified release formulations and drugs known to have a physiological absorption
window, marked permeability limited absorption or serious Cmax related effects. The interaction
potential should be considered and, if indicated, the effect should be studied on relevant drugs (e.g.
paracetamol as probe substrate in case of effects on gastric emptying). It should be remembered that
this is often a systemic effect that may be caused also by parenterally administered drugs. The
absorption of other drugs could also be affected through inhibition of intestinal transport proteins.
Advice on investigations of the effect of an investigational drug on active transport of other drugs is
given in section 5.3.4. If the investigation drug increases gastric pH, the effect on other drugs sensitive
to this should be predicted and the need for in vivo studies considered. Other mechanism of
interference with drug absorption, such as complex binding should also be considered. In vivo
investigations on the effect of the absorption of other drugs may be performed in parallel with the
phase III study, unless concomitant use of drugs potentially subject to a clinically relevant interaction
may not be managed by protocol restrictions in the phase II and III studies.
5.3.2.  Distribution
The degree of protein binding of the investigational drug should be determined before phase I. If the
investigational drug is extensively protein bound to a specific binding site and present at
concentrations saturating the binding sites, the risk of displacement of other drugs known to be
subject to clinically relevant displacement interactions could be evaluated in vitro at a time point
relevant for the clinical development program. If a clinically relevant interaction is predicted based on
in vitro data, an in vivo study measuring unbound concentrations could be considered.
5.3.3.  Metabolism
The potential of an investigational drug to inhibit or induce the metabolism of other drugs should be
investigated. Usually the investigation is initiated by in vitro studies and those studies are followed by

## Page 16

Guideline on the investigation of drug interactions
CPMP/EWP/560/95/Rev. 1 Corr. 2** Page 16/59

in vivo studies if the in vitro data show that an effect in vivo cannot be excluded. However, it is also
possible to study the effects of the investigational drug directly in vivo, e.g. by the use of cocktail
studies, which, if well designed may investigate both inhibitory (competitive and time-dependent) and
inducing effects of both parent and metabolites (See section 5.4.2).
It is recognised that obtaining high concentrations in the in vitro studies may not be possible in some
circumstances due to poor substance solubility or cell toxicity. In these cases, the data is assessed on
a case by case basis. If the in vitro studies are considered inconclusive, it is recommended that the
potential interaction is investigated in vivo.
5.3.3.1 Enzyme inhibition
A. In vitro enzyme inhibition studies
In vitro studies should be performed to investigate whether the investigational drug inhibits the
cytochrome P450 enzymes most commonly involved in drug metabolism. These presently include
CYP1A2, CYP2B6, CYP2C8, CYP2C9, CYP2C19, CYP2D6, and CYP3A. In the future, more clinically
important drug metabolising enzymes may be known and included in this list. In addition, it is
recommended to study inhibition of UGTs known to be involved in drug interactions, including UGT1A1
and UGT2B7, if one of the major elimination pathways of the investigational drug is direct
glucuronidation. Likewise, if the investigational drug is mainly metabolised by an enzyme not listed
above, it is recommended to study the inhibitory effect on that specific enzyme if feasible. It is also
recommended to investigate the enzyme inhibitory effect of major metabolites. More information on
this is found in the end of this subsection.
An in vitro inhibition study could be performed using human liver microsomes, hepatocytes, or other
cells expressing the investigated enzyme. The enzyme activity is monitored by investigating the
metabolism of a specific marker substrate (Table 4, Appendix VII) under linear substrate metabolism
conditions. CYP3A4 inhibition should be investigated using both midazolam and testosterone as
subsrates. The effect of a range of investigational drug concentrations are investigated and Ki (the
inhibition constant i.e. dissociation constant of the inhibitor from the enzyme-inhibitor complex) is
determined. The study should include an investigation of whether pre-incubation with the
investigational drug alters the inhibitory potential of the drug. If the pre -incubation affects the potency,
more detailed investigations are needed (see below). If the investigational drug is metabolised by the
enzymes present in the incubation, the marker substrate should, if possible, have a markedly faster
metabolism rate than the investigational drug to minimize the influence of investigational drug
metabolism (decreasing concentrations) on the Ki estimation. If this is not possible, the concentrations
of the investigational drug need to be monitored and/or the degradation taken into account in the
calculations. Known strong inhibitors should be included as positive controls in the study, their Ki
determined and compared to literature/reference in house values. The concentration range of the
investigational drug should be sufficiently high for detecting clinically relevant inhibition and depends
on the potential site of enzyme inhibition, mode of administration and formulation as well as systemic
exposure. It is recommended to use the estimated or determined unbound drug concentration in the in
vitro system. In situations where it is important to have a precise value on fu
mic (unbound microsomal
fraction), such as estimations of inhibition or induction potential not followed by an in vivo study,
determining the fraction (experimentally) is recommended. This also applies if there are reasons to
believe that the free inhibitor concentration is markedly lower than the total concentration in the
incubation, i.e. if the substance binds covalently to proteins or may adsorb to the walls of the test tube .
As the actual concentration of drug near the enzyme is unknown, there is an intra-study/systems
variability in Ki, and concentrations at the portal vein during absorption generally are higher than
systemic concentrations after oral administration, a safety factor is sometimes added in the
estimations. Recommendations regarding concentration ranges are given for different situations below.

## Page 17

Guideline on the investigation of drug interactions
CPMP/EWP/560/95/Rev. 1 Corr. 2** Page 17/59

If the incubations performed indicate that Ki will be markedly higher than the concentrations given
below, Ki does not need to be determined. However, a supportive discussion should be presented by
the applicant. If Ki has been determined in several in vitro systems, or with several substrates for the
same enzyme (e.g. CYP3A substrates), the lowest Ki adequately measured should be used in the
estimations of in vivo relevance.
If the inhibition is enhanced by pre-incubations, time-dependent inhibition (TDI) is present. The
increased inhibition over time may either be due to formation of an inhibitory metabolite or due to
mechanism-based inactivation (MBI). For mechanism based inactivators, kinact (maximum inactivation
rate constant) and KI (the inhibitor concentration producing half the maximal rate of inactivation)
should be determined. The in vitro study needs to be carefully performed and factors affecting the
results should be taken into account. See the scientific literature for relevant protocols. Please note the
need to determine non-specific binding at the initial step due to the general use of high protein
concentrations. If it is shown that the TDI is due to formation of a metabolite which reversibly inhibits
the affected enzyme, this has consequences for the in vivo relevance assessment as well as for the in
vivo study design (See section 5.4.4).
Intestinal exposure
If the drug is orally administered and the enzyme studied has pronounced intestinal expression (e.g.
CYP3A4) the concentration range should be sufficient for determining a Ki ≤ 0.1-fold the maximum
expected dose taken at one occasion /250 ml. If it is adequately justified that sufficiently high
concentrations may not be reached in the intestine due to solubility limitations in intestinal fluid, lower
concentrations can be sufficient.
Hepatic (and renal) exposure
If the enzyme studied is mainly available in the liver, or the kidney/another organ with main drug input
from the systemic circulation, the concentration range should allow determination of a Ki which is ≤
50-fold the mean unbound Cmax obtained during treatment with the highest dose. In this estimation,
when an estimation of fu is used, figures lower than 1% should not be used due to the uncertainties in
the estimation. Thus, as an example, if the free fraction has been estimated to be 0.5% in vitro or ex
vivo, a 1% free fraction should be used.
Enzyme inhibition by metabolites
The potential inhibitory effects of metabolites on the common drug metabolising enzymes should be
considered. As a pragmatic rule, it is recommended to investigate the enzyme inhibitory potential of
phase I metabolites with an AUC both larger than one fourth of the AUC of parent drug and larger than
10% of the drug-related exposure (radioactive moieties in the mass-balance study, see Appendix V). If
data on protein binding is available, unbound concentrations should be used. However, in absence of
these data, total concentrations (bound + unbound) may be used. As for the parent drug, the
concentration range studied should include 50-fold the unbound Cmax of the metabolite. As an
alternative to the in vitro investigation, a well designed cocktail study may be performed. In this case,
the study needs to be designed for observing potential mechanism based inhibition at steady state
concentrations of the metabolites (see section 5.4.4).
If there are indications that an observed in vivo drug interaction is caused by a metabolite, in vitro
enzyme inhibition studies on selected metabolites may provide useful information for the design of
future in vivo studies and interpretation of in vivo interaction study results.
Evaluation of the need for an in vivo study
Based on the results of the in vitro studies and the in vivo pharmacokinetics of the investigational
drug, the risk of inhibition in vivo is evaluated. If it cannot be excluded that enzyme inhibition takes

## Page 18

Guideline on the investigation of drug interactions
CPMP/EWP/560/95/Rev. 1 Corr. 2** Page 18/59

place in vivo, studies in vivo are recommended. The assessment may be based either on a “basic
model” (A:1 below) or on the “mechanistic static model” (A:2 below) (Fahmi et al, 20091) i.e.
evaluating the risk of inhibition by a worst case constant exposure of the investigational drug.
Additionally, well performed and qualified dynamic, PBPK, simulations may also be used as described
below (A:3).
The basic model may be used as a first screening method for this purpose. If the basic model gives a
positive inhibition signal, the evaluation may optionally be followed by an evaluation using the
mechanistic static or dynamic models below. The mechanistic static model may also be used for
estimating the net effect of reversible inhibition and MBI.
A:1 Basic Model
I) Reversible inhibition
If reversible inhibition (inhibition not affected by pre-incubation) is observed in vitro, the risk of
inhibition in vivo is evaluated by comparing observed Ki values with a worst case estimation of the
concentration near the enzyme during clinical use. In these calculations, the lowest figure on free
fraction recommended is 1% due to the uncertainties in the estimation.
Inhibition by parent drug
Enzyme inhibition in vivo by a parent drug cannot be excluded, and an in vivo interaction study with a
sensitive probe substrate is recommended, if the conditions below are fulfilled.
For orally administered drugs if the enzyme has marked abundance in the enterocyte (e.g. CYP3A):
[I] / Ki ≥ 10 where [I] is the maximum dose taken at one occasion/250 ml.

For drugs regardless of mode of administration and inhibition of enzymes in the liver, or in organs,
exposed to the drug through the systemic circulation
[I] / Ki ≥ 0.02 where [I] is the unbound mean Cmax obtained during treatment with the highest
recommended dose

Inhibition by metabolites
Enzyme inhibition in vivo by a metabolite cannot be excluded, and an in vivo interaction study with a
sensitive probe substrate is recommended, if the conditions below are fulfilled.
For metabolites regardless of mode of administration and site of the enzyme
[I] / Ki ≥ 0.02 where [I] is the unbound mean Cmax obtained during treatment with the highest dose
As for parent drug, a lower fu than 1% should not be used in the calculations due to the uncertainty in
the determination. If the protein binding has not been determined, the total (bound plus unbound)
concentration is used.
Due to the difficulties in predicting the concentration of inhibitory metabolite at the site(s) of the
enzyme, PBPK modelling and simulations are encouraged to support the evaluation. This may also
suitable when predicting the net inhibition of parent and metabolite on the same enzyme.

1 Fahmi et al Drug Metabolism and Disposition. 37:1658–1666, 2009

## Page 19

Guideline on the investigation of drug interactions
CPMP/EWP/560/95/Rev. 1 Corr. 2** Page 19/59

II)  Mechanism based inactivation
If MBI has been observed in vitro, the ratio of predicted CL in the absence and presence of the inhibitor
i.e. the AUC ratio with inhibitor to without inhibitor, may be calculated as
Eq. 1

R= (kobs+kdeg)/kdeg where Kobs=kinact×[I]/(KI+[I])
where kdeg is the degradation constant of the enzyme, kinact is the maximum inactivation rate constant
and [I] is the concentration of the inhibitor (See “Intestinal exposure” and “Hepatic (and renal)
exposure” above). The degradation constant may be taken from the scientific literature. If possible, the
constant should be based on in vivo data. Please note that enzymes which are present both in the
intestine and liver, such as CYP3A, have separate degradation constants in the two tissues. If ≥ 20%
inhibition is obtained, i.e.. R ≥1.25, using the drug concentrations presented above, in vivo inhibition
may not be excluded and a multiple dose in vivo interaction study is recommended (see Sections 5.4.3
and 5.4.4).
A:2 Mechanistic static model
A mechanistic static model has been proposed by Fahmi et al2 Eq. 2). This model includes the effect of
reversible and time dependent enzyme inhibition, as well as enzyme induction. Thus, the mechanistic
static model may be used as an aid to estimate the net effect of several interaction processes.
However, due to the limited experience with this model, it is presently not recommended to use Eq 2
to estimate the net effect of simultaneous inhibition and induction.
The model may be used as an alternative or subsequent approach to the basic model. Regardless of
the result of the basic model, if the mechanistic static model does not indicate in vivo inhibition, an in
vivo study is not required. However, as this model does not include a safety factor to take into account
inter-study variability in the Ki estimation or the potential for higher concentrations in the hepatocytes
than in plasma, Ki needs to be verified in a second in vitro system and the lowest Ki observed for the
specific enzyme used in the estimations. Furthermore, the potential for higher hepatocyte
concentrations should be discussed. If available data indicate that the drug may accumulate in
hepatocytes, this should be taken into account in the AUCR estimations.
If the model estimates a positive result, i.e. an AUCR outside 0.8-1.25, in vivo studies are indicated to
quantify the effect in vivo as well as, if needed, characterise the time course of the net effect.
Eq.2

A, B and C in the equation denotes MBI, induction and reversible inhibition, respectively and are
described in table 1 below. Fg is the fraction available after intestinal metabolism, and fm is the
fraction of systemic clearance of the substrate mediated by the CYP enzyme that is subject to
inhibition/induction. If the maximum effect on hepatic metabolism catalysed by a certain enzyme is to
be estimated, fm may be set to 1. If estimating the effect of a certain medicinal product, such as orally
administered midazolam, substance dependent parameters should be supported by scientific literature.
The induction part of the equation (Bh and Bg) may only be used after qualifying the hepatocyte batch
used for this purpose and is further discussed below in 5.3.3.2. In these calculations, the lowest figure

2 Fahmi et al Drug Metabolism and Disposition. 37:1658–1666; 2009

## Page 20

Guideline on the investigation of drug interactions
CPMP/EWP/560/95/Rev. 1 Corr. 2** Page 20/59

on free fraction recommended is 1% due to the uncertainties in the estimation. The input parameters
should all be discussed and if needed justified based on available data and/or scientific literature. A
conservative choice of parameters is recommended.
Table 1

Subscripts “h” and “g” denote liver and gut, respectively.
[I]h is the maximal unbound inhibitor/inducer concentration in portal vein ([I]u,inlet,max), decribed as
fu,b×([I]max,b+FaxFg×ka×Dose/QH) (Ito et al.3) where Fa is the fraction of the dose absorbed, Fg is
the fraction of absorbed dose escaping gutwall extraction, ka is the absorption rate constant and QH is
the total hepatic blood flow (97 L/hr, Yang et al 4), fu,b is the unbound fraction in blood and [I]max,b
is the maximal total (free and bound) inhibitor concentration in the blood at steady state. The ka
should preferably be determined but may otherwise be set, as a worst-case estimate, to 0.1/min. The
applicant should show in detail and justify how ka was estimated. If there is any uncertainty in the ka
estimate, a sensitivity analysis should be performed.
[I]g = Fa×ka×Dose/Qen (Rostami-Hodjegan and Tucker)5  where Qen, is the enterocyte bloodflow is
18L/h (Yang et al.6).
d is a scaling factor determined with linear regression of the control data set (see 5.3.3.2. A:2 below)
A:3 Dynamic, PBPK, model
PBPK simulations may also be used to evaluate the in vivo relevance of competitive or time-dependent
inhibition observed in vitro. In such a case, the scientific basis of the simulations (models as well as all
input parameters) should be presented and justified. Furthermore, extensive data on model verification
needs to be shown to support the ability to quantitatively predict drug-drug interaction via inhibition of
the specific enzyme. Simulations of available PK studies of the investigational drug should be compared
to the observed PK profiles.  When possible, model verification should include the simulations of the
effects of known interacting drugs on the PK of a probe substrate.
The in vitro data used needs to be of high quality, and any uncertainty in the model, for example in the
parameter(s) determined in vitro or parameters estimated, needs to be identified and subject to a

3 Ito et al AAPS PharmSci 4 (3) article 20; 2002
4 Yang et al. Drug Metabolism and Disposition 35:501-2; 2007
5 Rostami-Hodjegan A and Tucker GT, Drug Discov. Today Technol. 1:441–448; 2004
6 Yang J et al. Curr Drug Metab. 8(7):676-684; 2007

## Page 21

Guideline on the investigation of drug interactions
CPMP/EWP/560/95/Rev. 1 Corr. 2** Page 21/59

sensitivity analysis. Ki should, if possible, be verified in a second in vitro system. If protein binding is
high (>99%), a sensitivity analysis should be performed decreasing the binding down to 99%. The
consequences of higher concentrations of the inhibitory substance at the site of the enzyme (e.g. liver)
as compared to those in plasma, should be taken into account in the simulation. In both cases,
because the drug PBPK model needs to maintain its ability to predict the observed plasma
concentration-time curve of the interacting drug, a major part of the uncertainty could if suitable be
added, i.e. sensitivity analyses performed, on the interaction parameters (e.g. Ki). The parameter
range used in the sensitivity analysis should be justified, and a conservative approach is recommended.
Unless well justified, negligible protein binding should be assumed in the enterocyte when estimating
intestinal enzyme inhibition. Further information is given in section 5.5. If the simulation predicts an
inhibition of > 20% of the clearance of the probe substrate, a significant interaction in vivo cannot be
excluded and it is recommended to perform an in vivo study. If the results of the simulation with
appropriate sensitivity analyses are negative and the modelling is acceptable, no in vivo study of the
effect of the specific enzyme is required, regardless of the results of the basic model estimations or the
static mechanistic model.
B. Enzyme inhibition – in vivo studies
When investigating whether an investigational drug reversibly inhibits an enzyme, the
pharmacokinetics of a probe drug (see Appendix VII) should be investigated after administration of a
single-dose of the probe drug alone and at steady state concentrations of the investigational drug
obtained with the highest usual recommended dose.
If a well performed in vivo interaction study with a sensitive probe drug does not show enzyme
inhibition, these results can be extrapolated to all enzymes observed to be reversibly inhibited in vitro
for which an equal or higher Ki has been observed. However, due to inter-study variability, the Ki:s
used in this approach should have been determined in the same study. For orally administered
investigational drugs, lack of inhibition of hepatic enzymes may not be extrapolated to intestinal
enzymes, such as CYP3A, as the inhibitory concentration is the enterocytic, instead of hepatocytic,
concentration. If the inhibition is time-dependent, this should be reflected in the study design. More
information on in vivo study design is given in section 5.4.
5.3.3.2 Enzyme induction and down-regulation
A. Enzyme induction or down-regulation– in vitro studies
Studies should be performed to investigate whether the investigational drug induces enzymes and
transporters via activation of nuclear receptors, the Ah-receptor or, if relevant, other drug regulation
pathways. Usually, this is initially investigated in vitro followed by in vivo studies if indicated by the in
vitro results. However, it is also possible to investigate induction directly in vivo.
It should be noted that there may still be mechanisms of induction which presently are unknown.
Therefore, a potential human teratogen (Definition given in EMEA/CHMP/203927/2005) needs to be
studied in vivo for effects on contraceptive steroids if the drug is intended for use in fertile women,
regardless of the in vitro induction study results.
The in vitro induction studies may also detect enzyme down-regulation. Below advice is given primarily
on the investigation of the potential of an investigational drug to give induction. The experience is
presently very limited regarding drug-induced down-regulation and mechanisms behind these effects.
If a concentration-dependent down regulation is observed in vitro, additional in vitro (or in vivo)
studies of the effect on other drug metabolising enzymes are recommended to investigate which
enzymes are affected unless this may be predicted. Thus, the effect of the investigational drug on
enzymes observed to be down-regulated in vitro and/or the enzymes at risk of down-regulation based
on mechanistic knowledge should be studied in vivo.

## Page 22

Guideline on the investigation of drug interactions
CPMP/EWP/560/95/Rev. 1 Corr. 2** Page 22/59

Cultured hepatocytes (fresh or cryopreserved) are the preferred in vitro system for induction (and
down-regulation) in vitro studies. Minimally derived hepatocyte lines (e.g. HepaRG), nuclear receptor
binding assays, or reporter gene assays are considered as supportive data only.
Incubations are performed with daily addition of the investigational drug. The duration of the
incubation is generally 3 days. Shorter durations should be well justified. The medium, containing the
drug, is changed regularly. Knowledge about the actual concentration of drug in the system is
important for the in vitro-in vivo extrapolation. Unless loss due to in vitro drug metabolism,
degradation or lysosomal trapping of drug during culture conditions has been shown to be negligible,
or if the loss has been quantified in the system prior to the induction assay and compensated for
through the amount of drug added /medium change interval, measurements of concentration of parent
drug in the medium are encouraged at several time points the last day of the incubation. Unless the
incubations are run under serum-free conditions or degree of protein binding in human plasma is low,
the degree of protein binding in the medium should be determined and unbound concentration used
throughout the in vitro evaluation. The possibility of non-specific binding should also be taken into
account.

To increase the sensitivity of the assay and for the response not to be affected by enzyme inhibition, it
is recommended to measure the extent of enzyme induction at mRNA level. If induction due to protein
stabilisation is suspected, induction should be measured also at activity level.
If it is not possible to reach sufficiently high concentrations (see below) e.g. due to cell toxicity and the
study is judged inconclusive, the potential for induction should be studied in vivo.
Culture quality should be verified and documented by enzyme mRNA measurements and cell
morphology. A suitable viability assessment should be performed before and at the end of the
incubation period at the highest concentration level to certify that cell toxicity is not influencing the
induction response. If toxicity/loss of viability is observed, influence on the study results should be
discussed in the study report and in vivo studies be considered.
It is recommended to first evaluate the induction potential using the basic model. If the basic method
indicates induction via PXR, the evaluation can continue using the mechanistic static model and/or the
RIS correlation model provided it is possible to apply sufficiently high concentration of the
investigational drug for E
max and EC50 to be determined. For the latter approaches, only one well
performing batch of hepatocytes is needed. If the basic method indicates that the investigational drug
induces drug metabolising enzymes to a great extent through CAR, it is presently difficult to use the
mechanistic static or RIS correlation method due to the difficulties in performing an adequate method
qualification. In the future it may however be possible to use these approaches. At present, if CAR
seems to play a major role in the induction, in vivo data is needed to support the induction evaluation
of separate CAR regulated enzymes.
A:1 Basic method
Incubations with cultured (fresh or cryopreserved) hepatocytes are performed as above. Due to the
inter-individual and cell batch variability in induction response, it is recommended to use hepatocytes
from at least 3 different evaluable donors for the “basic method” evaluation. If cells from a donor do
not respond satisfactorily to the positive controls, if the viability of the cells is <80% at the start of the
incubation, or if the viability at the end of the incubation deviates markedly from the other donors, the
cells should be replaced by hepatocytes from a new donor. A number of enzymes could be investigated.
The enzymes CYP3A4, CYP2B6 and CYP1A2 should always be included as markers of induction
mediated via PXR/CAR (CYP3A4, CYP2B6) and the Ah-receptor (CYP1A2).
Strong inducers should be included as positive controls to verify functioning regulation pathways via
PXR, CAR and the Ah-receptor (GR for investigational drugs with glucocorticoid activity). Other

## Page 23

Guideline on the investigation of drug interactions
CPMP/EWP/560/95/Rev. 1 Corr. 2** Page 23/59

receptors/transcription factors and enzymes may be added to this list as science develops. The positive
controls used should be as selective as possible and be chosen based on current scientific knowledge.
Currently, rifampicin (20µM) is recommended as positive control for PXR, CITCO (≤100 nM) for CAR,
omeprazole (50µM) for the Ah-receptor and dexamethasone (50µM) for GR.
The investigational drug concentration range that needs to be investigated depends on enzyme studied
and the in vivo pharmacokinetics of the drug. The studied exposure range (or range of the worst case
unbound average concentration in the media (Cavg)), should cover the worst case concentrations
expected in the hepatocytes in vivo. At present, 50-fold the mean unbound maximum plasma
concentration (Cmax) obtained at steady state during treatment with the maximum therapeutic dose
seems sufficient for drugs affecting enzymes in the liver. For intestinal enzymes (CYP3A4) the
maximum concentration may be set to 0.1*dose/250ml. At least three different concentrations should
be used.
The induction results are evaluated separately for each donor and the donor cells with the most
pronounced induction effect on the specific enzyme should then be used as a “worst case” in the
subsequent calculations. The levels of mRNA are compared to the control (vehicle) incubations. The in
vitro study is considered positive for enzyme induction if incubations with the investigational drug at
the concentration given above give rise to a more than 100% increase in mRNA and the increase is
concentration dependent. To ensure adequate sensitivity of the assay, an observed concentration-
dependent increase in mRNA of <100% can be considered as a negative finding only when the increase
in mRNA is less than 20% of the response of the positive control (rifampicin 20 µM or, for Ah-receptor
activation, omeprazole 50 μM).
A positive or inconclusive in vitro result should be confirmed in vivo or lack of induction potential needs
to be shown in another in vitro study.
If a 50% decrease in mRNA is observed which may not be attributable to cell toxicity, this may indicate
down-regulation of the enzyme and an in vivo study investigating this time-dependent phenomenon is
recommended. If the in vitro study is inconclusive, additional studies, in vitro and/or in vivo are
recommended.
A:2 RIS correlation method
Using the RIS method, a certain batch of hepatocytes is “qualified” for future induction studies. (Fahmi
and Ripp, 2010
7). A large set of inducers (n≥8) covering the full in vivo induction potency range and
including at least 2 mild inducers, are used in the qualification process. Emax and EC50 are determined
for all inducers and the correlation of the RIS (relative induction score, see Eq 3 below), vs. in vivo
change in the AUC of a certain enzyme probe drug (e.g. midazolam) for each inducer is calculated.
Eq.3.
RIS = Emax*[I]/ (EC50 + [I])
Where EC50 is the concentration causing half the maximal effect; Emax is the maximum induction effect;
and [I] is the unbound maximum plasma concentration in plasma.
If this method is used, both the qualification data set/qualification report and the data on the
investigational new drug should be submitted. Based on the qualification data set, the relationship
between in vitro inducing potency (RIS) and observed in vivo effect on midazolam is used to set a
predefined cut-off for risk of mild in vivo induction. The risk of induction in vivo is then assessed using
the estimated RIS of the investigational drug.

7 Fahmi and Ripp, 2010 (Expert Opinion on Drug Metabolism and Toxicology 2010, 6 (11):1399-1416)

## Page 24

Guideline on the investigation of drug interactions
CPMP/EWP/560/95/Rev. 1 Corr. 2** Page 24/59

The concentrations of investigational drug used for the RIS estimation should be in accordance with the
mechanistic-static model estimations and where the enzyme induced is mainly located. Thus, for
CYP3A induction estimations, the RIS calculations should be based on the unbound hepatic inlet plus
the maximum enterocyte concentrations. As for inhibition, the possibility of a higher concentration in
the hepatocytes than in plasma should be discussed and taken into account in the evaluation.
Furthermore, if there are indications of pronounced metabolism of the investigational drug in the
hepatocytes, likely to affect the E
max and EC50 estimation to a more marked extent than the positive
control inducers used to qualify the hepatocytes, this needs to be reflected in the analysis, e.g. through
a sensitivity analysis.
When performing the in vitro study investigating the induction potential of the investigational drug, at
least 2 of the inducers of the qualification set should be included as positive controls having a
predefined response range at the applied concentration to verify that the qualification is valid for the
actual in vitro experiment.
A:3 Mechanistic static model
The mechanistic static model may be used to assess the in vivo inducing potency of a drug based on in
vitro induction data (Fahmi and Ripp, 20108). Using this method, the in vitro system is qualified in a
similar way as the RIS correlation method (see above). The qualification is based on determinations of
EC50 and Emax of a large set of inducers of different potency and how well the mechanistic static model
predicts the observed effect of the inducers. A scaling factor is estimated enabling the translation of
individual EC50 and Emax values into validated parameters to be included in the mechanistic static
model. The approach proposed in the mechanistic static model (see table 1) includes the use of the
observed in vitro induction parameters of the control inducers to predict the in vivo effects of the
inducers on a specific probe drug (e.g. midazolam). The predicted effect is then compared with the
observed effect of the probe drug in vivo and a scaling factor, d, is estimated (see table 1). The scaling
factor is then used in the estimations of the in vivo effect by the investigational drug using the
mechanistic static model and the observed EC
50 and Emax of the investigational drug. In the study
where IC50 and Emax is determined for the investigational drug, at least two inducers at specified
concentrations needs to be included as positive controls. The acceptance range of the controls should
be predefined based on the qualification results.
As when using the RIS correlation method (see above), the possibility of a higher concentration in the
hepatocytes than in plasma should be considered, as well as pronounced metabolism of the
investigational drug.
If aiming to estimate the exposure of a probe drug resulting from both induction and inhibition
(reversible or MBI), an in vivo study is recommended due to the limited experience with the
mechanistic static model for quantifying the interaction effect and  the likely need to investigate the
time course of the net interaction effect to optimize the treatment recommendations.
B. Enzyme induction or down-regulation - in vivo studies
If in vitro induction results have indicated that induction or down-regulation in vivo may not be
excluded, an in vivo study should be performed investigating the effect on that specific enzyme. In
such a study, the pharmacokinetics of a probe drug (see Appendix VII) is determined after a single
dose administration alone and after multiple dose administrations of the highest recommended dose of
the investigational drug (see section 5.4). If there are indications that the investigational drug both
inhibits and induces drug metabolising enzymes, it is recommended to study the pharmacokinetics of

8 Fahmi and Ripp, 2010 (Fahmi and Ripp, Expert Opinion on Drug Metabolism and Toxicology 2010, 6 (11):1399-1416)

## Page 25

Guideline on the investigation of drug interactions
CPMP/EWP/560/95/Rev. 1 Corr. 2** Page 25/59

the probe drug at both early and late time points during the investigational drug treatment period. The
effect of reversible inhibition may be more pronounced in the beginning of the treatment and the
induction may be most pronounced after ending the treatment. If screening for induction is performed
in vivo as a replacement of an in vitro study, the effect on CYP3A, CYP2B6 and CYP1A2 should be
included.
If induction through PXR/CAR activation is indicated in vitro, an in vivo induction study should be
performed investigating the effect on CYP3A. If CYP3A is inhibited by the investigational drug, (an)
other inducible enzyme(s) such as CYP2C9 and CYP2C19 should be investigated. If the in vitro data
indicate that CAR may have a major role in the induction observed, e.g. if CYP2B6 is induced to an
unusually marked extent, an in vivo study on a CYP2B6 probe drug should be considered.
If clinically relevant induction or down-regulation is observed in vivo, it is likely the investigational drug
also affects other enzymes, or transporters, regulated through the same regulatory pathways.
However, it is difficult to extrapolate the effect quantitatively to the co-regulated proteins, which may
be induced/down regulated to a lesser extent. Therefore, if the investigational drug is verified to be an
inducer in vivo or if down-regulation is observed, the effect on co-regulated enzymes and transporters
should preferably be quantified in vivo. This may be investigated in a cocktail study using full AUC or, if
needed, fractional metabolic clearance measurements. Enzymes and transporters at risk of induction
should be discussed based on the available scientific literature.
5.3.4.  Transport
5.3.4.1. Inhibition of transport proteins
In vitro inhibition studies are recommended to investigate whether the investigational drug inhibits any
of the transporters known to be involved in clinically relevant in vivo drug interactions. Presently, these
include P-glycoprotein/MDR1 (ABCB1), OATP1B1 (SLCO1B1), OATP1B3 (SLCO1B3), OCT2 (SLC22A2),
OAT1 (SLC22A6), OAT3 (SLC22A8) and BCRP (ABCG2). Investigations of the inhibitory effect on OCT1
(SLC22A1), MATE1 (SLC47A1) and MATE2 (SLC47A) could also be considered. Inhibition of the
transporter BSEP (ABCB11) should also preferably be investigated. If in vitro studies indicate BSEP
inhibition adequate biochemical monitoring including serum bile salts is recommended during drug
development. In vitro data on transporter inhibition should preferably be available before initiating
phase III. The knowledge about transporters and their in vivo importance is evolving quickly. The
choice of transporters investigated should be driven by scientific evidence, and transporters may be
added to or removed from the list as science develops. In addition to the listed transporters, there may
also be a need to investigate effects on other transporters to clarify the mechanism of an unexpected
interaction observed in vivo. As science is rapidly evolving in this field, no lists on in vitro and in vivo
substrates are presented as such lists may need frequent updates. The substrates/probe drugs chosen
should be based on the current scientific literature.
It is recommended to use an in vitro system where the human in vivo transport functions of the
transporter are preserved. The influence of passive permeability should also be taken into account
when choosing an in vitro system. The effect of different concentrations of the investigational drug on
transport of a substrate for the specific transporter should be investigated and Ki calculated. At present,
the optimal way to determine Ki is under discussion. The applicant is recommended to follow the
scientific literature. IC50 may be used only in situations where Ki is not possible to obtain and if used,
linear conditions and lack of time-dependency of the inhibition should be shown. The in vitro study
should include known inhibitors (strong and less potent) as positive controls. The choice of substrates
and inhibitors should be justified.

## Page 26

Guideline on the investigation of drug interactions
CPMP/EWP/560/95/Rev. 1 Corr. 2** Page 26/59

The study should be performed over the concentration range of the investigational drug expected to be
relevant for the site of interaction. The highest concentration studied should be sufficient for
determining Ki ≤ the following concentration
• For intestinally expressed transporters like Pgp, the maximum expected concentration in the
intestinal lumen on the apical side of the enterocytes (0.1-fold the maximum dose on one
occasion/250 ml) or, if low solubility, the maximum possible concentration at the pH range of
the GI tract.
• For hepatic uptake transporters, a concentration of 25-fold the unbound hepatic inlet
concentration ([I]u,inlet,max) after oral administration.
• For renal uptake and efflux transporters, for hepatic efflux transporters and hepatic uptake
transporters after iv administration, a concentration 50-fold unbound Cmax.
In these calculations, the unbound fraction should be set to 1% if determined to be <1%. Non-specific
binding should be considered also in these systems.
In vivo inhibition of a transporter at a certain site can be excluded if the observed Ki value is higher
than or equal to the concentrations given above (0.1*dose/250 ml, 25*([I]u,inlet,max, or 50*
unbound Cmaxu, respectively).
Due to the current high inter-laboratory variability in the inhibition parameter estimation for Pgp, the
use of two separate systems is recommended for this transporter. This approach could also be
considered for other transporters if indicated. If in vivo inhibition may not be excluded based on the Ki,
an in vivo study is recommended. If inhibition may be of relevance at several clinically relevant
physiological sites, the study should if possible aim at investigating the extent of inhibition at those
sites. For P-glycoprotein, renal inhibition can be determined using renal clearance of digoxin. Inhibition
of intestinal Pgp may be assessed in an in vivo DDI study with a sufficiently specific Pgp substrate with
low oral bioavailability. Dabigatran etexilate or, if no OATP1B1 or 1B3 inhibition is expected,
fexofenadine, seems to be more sensitive to intestinal Pgp inhibition than oral digoxin. Therefore,
these drugs, and in particular dabigatran etexilate due to the clinical relevance, are presently
recommended as probes for intestinal Pgp inhibition. The applicant should follow the scientific literature
in this area as better probes may become established in the future.
5.3.4.2. Induction of transport proteins
If an investigational drug has been observed to be an inducer of enzymes via nuclear receptors such as
PXR and CAR, it is likely that transporters regulated through these receptors will be induced. If PXR
and/or CAR mediated induction is observed in vivo, a study investigating the in vivo induction of Pgp
mediated transport is recommended. The need for in vivo studies of the potential inducing effect on
other transporters regulated through the same pathways should also be considered. If the
investigational drug will often be combined with a drug which has a pharmacokinetics significantly
influenced by a PXR or CAR regulated transporter, an interaction study with that drug is recommended
to enable specific treatment recommendations for the combination.
5.4.  Design of in vivo studies
The design of the in vivo interaction study is adapted to the aim of the study, the mechanism(s) of the
potential interaction investigated, pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic drug characteristics, mode
of administration, safety aspects and target patient population etc. However, some general
considerations are found below. An in vivo interaction study usually is of cross-over or sequential
design. Parallel group design is generally not recommended due to the confounding inter-individual
variability. Comparisons with historical controls are generally not acceptable. However, if a crossover

## Page 27

Guideline on the investigation of drug interactions
CPMP/EWP/560/95/Rev. 1 Corr. 2** Page 27/59

or sequential design is impossible to perform, a parallel group design may be acceptable. If it is
suspected that compliance with study treatment could be reduced e.g. due to a long treatment
duration or due to adverse effects, compliance should be checked regularly through plasma
concentration measurements during the study. An open study is satisfactory, but blinding should be
considered if pharmacodynamic markers are included in the study. Simulations may provide valuable
information for optimising the study design.
5.4.1.  Study population
Interaction studies are usually performed in healthy adults although in some cases, e.g. for
tolerability/safety reasons, patients are included. Historically, the number of subjects in interaction
studies has been small. However, the number of subjects in an in vivo interaction study should be
determined taking into account intra-subject variability (inter-subject variability in cases of parallel
group design) as well as the magnitude of the effect considered relevant to detect. In some situations
where it is particularly important to estimate the range of the interaction effect and where potential
outliers are important for the treatment recommendations, inclusion of a large number of subjects in a
crossover-study should be considered.
In a parallel group study, the subjects should be matched for intrinsic and extrinsic factors likely to
affect the pharmacokinetics of the studied drug. In a cross-over study, the demographics of the
subjects are not of importance unless there are indications that the interaction effect may be
significantly affected by such factors. However, genotyping for genes coding for relevant enzymes and
transporters are generally encouraged. If the pharmacokinetics of the drug are significantly affected by
genetic polymorphism and it is expected that patients of a certain genotype have a larger interaction
effect, it is recommended that the interaction potential is evaluated separately in that subgroup (see
section 5.2.5.). Subjects lacking the enzyme potentially inhibited in an interaction study should
preferably be excluded from the study unless their inclusion serves to clarify the mechanism of an
interaction.
5.4.2.  Probe drugs and cocktail studies
In vivo studies performed to investigate whether the investigational drug inhibits or induces a drug
metabolising enzyme or transporter in vivo should be performed with well validated probe drugs. A
probe drug is a drug which is exclusively or almost exclusively eliminated through metabolism
catalysed by one specific enzyme or eliminated through excretion by one specific transporter in vivo. If
a second enzyme or transporter is involved in the elimination of parent drug, its contribution to total
clearance should be very small. The drug should have a well characterised elimination and enzyme/
transporter contribution in vivo and should have linear pharmacokinetics. Examples of probe drugs for
various enzymes are given in Appendix VII. Other drugs than the listed ones may be used if justified.
Only probe drugs for the most commonly involved CYPs are given in appendix VII. If inhibition of other
enzymes is to be studied, the applicant should base the choice or “probe drug” and parameters
investigated on the scientific literature. Marker reactions, i.e. metabolic reactions known to be
catalysed by only one enzyme, may sometimes be used (see below).
The probe drug for CYP3A should be subject to both marked intestinal and hepatic 3A catalysed
metabolism. The use of orally administered midazolam is recommended. If the drug is likely to be
administered with i.v. administered CYP3A substrates and a marked effect is found on orally
administered midazolam, an interaction study with i.v midazolam should be considered to investigate
the effect on systemic CYP3A catalysed metabolism, as this enables better interactions predictions. If
this approach is chosen, appropriate safety precautions should be made. Alternatively, PBPK could be

## Page 28

Guideline on the investigation of drug interactions
CPMP/EWP/560/95/Rev. 1 Corr. 2** Page 28/59

helpful in estimating the effect on hepatic CYP3A4 based on the results in the oral midazolam DDi
study.
It is possible to use so called “cocktail studies” to investigate the effects of an investigational drug on
several enzymes and transporters in one in vivo study. If well designed, cocktail studies may
investigate both inhibitory (competitive and time-dependent) and inducing effects. The study is usually
used to investigate the effects indicated in vitro. In vivo cocktail studies may also be used to replace
studies of the in vitro inhibition and induction potential of parent drug (and metabolites) on enzymes
(and transporters).
The “cocktail” should be composed of specific probe drugs (see also appendix VIII) for each of the
enzymes to be studied. The specificity of the probe drugs should have been demonstrated in DDI
studies with selective inhibitors of the specific enzyme and/or in pharmacogenetic studies. It should
have been demonstrated in vivo that the probe drugs combined in the “cocktail” do not interact with
each other. The doses used should preferably be the doses used in this validation. Deviations from this
should be justified. Full characterisation of the plasma concentration-time curves of the probe drug is
recommended, estimating the effect on (oral) clearance or AUC. If satisfactorily performed, the results
of the cocktail studies can be extrapolated to other drugs and can be used to support treatment
recommendations in the SmPC.
In most cases, metabolite to parent drug ratios does not provide a true quantification of the effect on
enzyme activity. Furthermore, the ratios are affected by the clearance of the metabolite. Therefore,
use of metabolite to parent drug concentration ratios in plasma or urine is generally not recommended.
However, in cases where characterisation of the full concentration-time curve is not feasible, the ratios
may be used as a semi-quantitative screening for enzyme inhibition and induction. However, in these
cases, the potential effect of the investigational drug on the clearance of the metabolite should be
negligible.
If optimal probe drugs are lacking, clearance through a specific pathway may be investigated as a
marker for the enzyme catalysing that pathway. It should be possible to determine the fractional
metabolic clearance along this pathway. This is calculated as a ratio between the sum of all primary
and secondary metabolites formed through the specific pathway and excreted in urine divided by AUC
of the parent drug (ΣAem
0-∞/AUCM
0-∞). Another method to quantify the effect on a certain enzyme
based on an effect on the AUC of a non-selective probe drug, is to back-calculate the effect on AUC
observed to an effect on the pathway of interest using prior in vivo data on the relative contribution of
the pathway to systemic clearance. If these two approaches are used, it should be verified that parallel
pathways are not affected by the investigational drug.
5.4.3.  Dose, formulation and time of administration
A. The perpetrator drug
The systemic exposure of the potential perpetrator drug should be the exposure obtained with the
highest generally recommended dose under therapeutic (steady state) conditions. If a worst case
estimation is aimed at, the dosing frequency of the perpetrator should be the approved/intended
dosing frequency that is likely to give rise to the most marked interaction. If the highest expected
exposure is not studied, this should be well justified (e.g. safety aspects). In this case, well performed
PBPK simulations may be used to predict the likely effect on active substance exposure if all interaction
mechanisms are included and the model predicts the results of the studied dose adequately. If a
metabolite is responsible for the enzyme inhibition, steady state of the metabolite should have been
reached. The duration of the treatment with the perpetrator drug should be long enough to certify that
it covers at least 90% of the plasma concentration-time curve (sampling period) of the victim drug

## Page 29

Guideline on the investigation of drug interactions
CPMP/EWP/560/95/Rev. 1 Corr. 2** Page 29/59

(see also section 5.4.4 for time-dependent interactions). If the perpetrator is a strong inhibitor chosen
to estimate the maximum effect on the investigational drug exposure (as well as to quantify enzyme
contribution to the overall elimination of the investigational drug), the choice of perpetrator and its
dosing regimen should be chosen to obtain maximum inhibition at the site(s) of the enzyme during the
full plasma concentration-time course of the investigational drug. If the perpetrator drug is the
investigational drug and a dose-range is recommended for the perpetrator drug, studying several dose
levels should be carefully considered if a significant effect is found using the highest dose. PKPB
simulations may be used for these estimations provided that the interaction effect of the highest dose
is well predicted. However, dependent on the therapeutic index of the victim drug, a conventional
interaction study may be needed to support a dose adjustment of the victim drug.
In some cases, alternative perpetrator drug regimens, such as a high single-dose, may be used to
reach concentrations higher than the maximum steady state concentrations during the plasma
concentration time-course of the probe drug. This design is not appropriate for quantifying an
inhibitory effect during therapeutic use or any time-dependent phenomena, but it may be used as a
first qualitative screening for competitive inhibition.
B. The victim drug
If the victim drug has linear pharmacokinetics, it is sufficient to investigate the pharmacokinetics of the
victim drug after a single-dose with and without treatment with the perpetrator drug. Any dose in the
linear range can be used. If the victim drug has dose-dependent pharmacokinetics, the dose used
should be the therapeutic dose for which the most pronounced interaction is expected. If the dose-
dependency is more pronounced at multiple-dose conditions, a steady state comparison of the
pharmacokinetics of the victim drug is recommended. If the victim drug has time-dependent
pharmacokinetics, this should be reflected in the study design (see section 5.4.4).
If a mutual (2-way) interaction is expected, it is recommended that both drugs are administered until
steady state and compared with steady state pharmacokinetics of the separate drugs administered
alone or, if both drugs show dose and time independent pharmacokinetics, a single dose of the
separate drugs administered alone.
When the perpetrator or victim drugs are administered to obtain a steady state exposure, a loading
dose regimen may be used to shorten the time needed to reach steady state if this is possible from a
safety point of view. However, the duration of the treatment needs to be considered if a time-
dependent mechanism is investigated.
The safety of the subjects in the study should always be considered. A reduced dose of the victim
drug(s) may need to be considered for safety reasons.
C. Formulations
The possibility of formulation differences in interaction potential should be considered when
extrapolating interaction study results between formulations. This applies particularly to differences in
route of administration or substantial differences in in vivo rate and extent of absorption between
formulations. Simulations may help in evaluating the need for additional studies. If it is likely that the
interaction potential (both as victim and as perpetrator drug) is markedly different separate in vivo
studies may be needed for specific formulations. The worst case scenario, i.e. the formulation likely to
give the most marked interaction may be studied initially followed by studies as needed with other
formulations.
D. Relative time of administration
The effect of administration time of the victim and perpetrator drug should be carefully considered. In
all in vivo interaction studies, the time between administrations of the two drugs should be specified.

## Page 30

Guideline on the investigation of drug interactions
CPMP/EWP/560/95/Rev. 1 Corr. 2** Page 30/59

Usually the drugs are administered simultaneously but sometimes the most marked interaction is
obtained when the drugs are administered at separate time-points. Recommendations of drug
administration in relation to food should be followed. If these recommendations are different for the
included drugs, this should be considered in the study design.
If a large part of the interaction occurs during first-pass, the interaction may be minimised through
“staggered dosing”, i.e. by separating the administrations of the two drugs in time. This approach
should be considered if appropriate from a compliance perspective, in particular if the victim drug does
not exist in a suitable strength for making a suitable dose adjustment.
5.4.4.  Time dependencies
For time-dependent interactions, i.e. induction or “time-dependent” inhibition, the study should aim to
investigate the interaction effect at the time-point where the induction or inhibition effect is at or near
its maximum.
The maximum effect is expected when a new steady state level of the affected enzyme has been
obtained. This is dependent on the rate of enzyme turnover (kdeg), and on the time needed to reach
steady state for the inducer/inhibitor. For time-dependent inhibitors, the course of inhibition is also
dependent on the inactivation rate constant (kinact). The processes leading to a new steady state level
of active enzyme take place simultaneously. The required duration of treatment depends on how
precisely the interaction effect needs to be determined. If the study aims to investigate whether an
investigational drug is an inducer or a time-dependent inhibitor in vivo, determining 80% of the
induction or inhibition effect is sufficient. If the interaction study will be used for dosing
recommendations, a study investigating the true maximum effect is needed. The chosen duration
should be justified, e.g. by simulations, and the estimated % of maximum induction/inhibition be
presented. At present, a range of enzyme half-life values are reported in the literature. If available,
use of reliable in vivo estimations is preferred. The choice of k
deg value should be justified based on the
scientific literature. The chosen treatment duration should be justified, e.g. by simulations, where a
sensitivity analysis can be made to account for the variability in the reported kdeg /enzyme half-lives. A
loading dose regimen to reach steady state of the inducer/inhibitor faster may be used as long as the
treatment duration at steady state is sufficient for the target fraction of the new steady state enzyme
levels to be reached. If it is also valuable to know the effect at other time points during drug treatment,
adding more determinations of the victim drug´s pharmacokinetics is recommended.
If “time-dependent” inhibition has been observed to be caused by a metabolite reversibly inhibiting the
enzyme, the duration of the treatment with the parent drug should be sufficient for steady state of the
metabolite to be reached. If the (apparent) half-life of the metabolite has not been determined, the
half-life of radioactivity determined in the mass-balance study (see Appendix IV) may be used as a
worst-case estimation.
When designing a study investigating the effect of an inducer on the pharmacokinetics of an
investigational drug, the need to measure metabolite exposures should be considered (see 5.4.5).
5.4.5.  Active metabolites
If there are active metabolites contributing to the efficacy and safety of the drug, the exposure to
these metabolites should be evaluated in the interaction studies. Moreover, if there are
pharmacologically active metabolites which do not contribute significantly to in vivo effects of an
investigational drug during normal conditions, the need for determining the exposure of these
metabolites should be considered as a marked increase in exposure resulting from the interaction could
be clinically relevant.

## Page 31

Guideline on the investigation of drug interactions
CPMP/EWP/560/95/Rev. 1 Corr. 2** Page 31/59

Measuring metabolites, regardless of pharmacological activity, to improve understanding of the
mechanism of an interaction, should also be considered. This is of particular importance where multiple
elimination pathways are affected by a perpetrator.
5.4.6.  Pharmacokinetic parameters
The pharmacokinetic parameters determined should be the ones relevant for the use and interpretation
of the study results. Usually such parameters include Cmax, Tmax and AUC, CL and the terminal half-
life. If Ctrough has been found to be closely related to clinical efficacy or safety, Ctrough should also be
investigated or simulated based on single-dose data. Measuring renal clearance should be considered if
the perpetrator may affect renal secretion of a drug. If the binding of a drug to plasma proteins is
concentration dependent within the therapeutic concentration range, or if the concentrations of binding
proteins may change significantly during the study (e.g. SHBG, sex hormone binding globulin for
contraceptive steroids), it is recommended to determine unbound plasma drug concentrations.
Unbound concentrations should also be determined when investigating potential displacement
interactions.
Inclusion of a pharmacodynamic marker or a relevant clinical test is generally encouraged, especially
when investigating an interaction at transporter level, or in case both a pharmacodynamic and a
pharmacokinetic interaction is expected.
5.4.7.  Population pharmacokinetic analysis
If conventional interaction studies with rich sampling cannot be performed, the potential for
interactions may be investigated in a well performed population PK analysis on high quality data from
sparse samples (i.e. phase 2/3 data). This is mainly appropriate when the interaction study needs to
be performed in patients. The approach could also be used to detect unexpected interactions. The
method is mainly used to investigate the effects of other drugs on the investigational drug.
If a population pharmacokinetic analysis is used, the analysis should be performed according to well-
established scientific knowledge, the model should be qualified in relation to its purposes (e.g.
predictive properties for various sub-populations and analysis of precision using adequate methods)
and the analysis needs to be reported appropriately.
Further, the background information needs to be of high quality. To draw inference from a population
analysis, the documentation about doses of concomitant drugs needs to be properly recorded,
including the dose, timing of doses and also whether the patient has been on the concomitant drug for
a sufficient time period at the time of blood sampling. This detailed information may be difficult to
collect for many drugs. Based on knowledge of frequently co-administered medicinal products and
suspected interaction, a well-founded decision on drugs to study could be taken prior to the study.
Further, the quantification of the interaction will be dependent on the doses of the perpetrator drugs
used. Thus, the maximum effect of the interaction may be difficult to establish.
The information obtained in the population PK analysis may be used in the product information but
needs to be worded properly. For example, it may be stated that a population PK analysis based on
phase III data indicated that concomitant treatment with drug X at a dose range y-z mg reduced the
systemic exposure by on average w% (range).
A sufficient number of patients should be treated with the investigational drug and the concomitantly
given drug. A power analysis can be performed a priori to estimate the minimum effect size that is
likely to be detected with acceptable precision in a study using a given number of patients on a
concomitant drug. The size of the effect that is of interest to be detected should be guided by the

## Page 32

Guideline on the investigation of drug interactions
CPMP/EWP/560/95/Rev. 1 Corr. 2** Page 32/59

therapeutic index of the investigational drug (See also section 5.7.2.). Pooling of data for different
drugs, e.g. based on inhibitory potency, should in general not be performed unless the inhibitory or
inducing potency is very similar. If possible, it may be advantageous to determine plasma
concentration(s) of potentially interacting drugs.
Due to the sparse sampling in phase II and III studies, the absorption phase (and accordingly Cmax)
may not be properly described, and therefore the population analysis may not be sensitive to identify
and quantify an interaction with large effects on Cmax. Usually, the effects of concomitant drugs on
oral clearance (CL/F) are identified. Thus, for drugs where it is known that Cmax may be related to
adverse effects or efficacy, time points for PK sampling should be carefully selected, otherwise the
population approach is of limited value.
To draw appropriate conclusions from the population analysis the uncertainty in the estimated
interaction effects (eg. 95% confidence intervals) should be estimated by appropriate methods, i.e.
preferably using methods not assuming symmetrical distribution of the confidence interval, e.g.
bootstrapping or log-likelihood profiling. Such uncertainty analysis is of importance when the aim is to
claim no effect of a concomitant drug, as well as when significant effects have been identified.
Depending on the width of this confidence interval, the uncertainty of the conclusion (lack of an
interaction and/or clinical relevance of an interaction) can be assessed. If an interaction effect is found
that needs to result in a dose adjustment of the victim drug, a conventional study is usually needed to
support the quantitative adjustment unless the dose may be titrated based on a clinical or PK marker.
5.5.  PBPK modelling and simulation
PBPK modelling and simulations may be used at different stages of drug development. Early in drug
development, PBPK modelling and simulations serve two main purposes  in the interactions assessment.
PBPK simulations may support the absence of in vivo drug-drug interaction potential, as stated in
section 5.3.3.1A. If adequately qualified, it may also support the statements regarding restrictions in
concomitant medications in clinical trials while planned in vivo drug-drug interaction studies have not
been performed. During late stages of drug development, when more in vivo data are available,
including results from pharmacokinetic studies using a variety of dosing regimens and route of
administrations and drug-drug interaction studies with strong enzyme inhibitors intended to identify
worst case scenarios, the information obtained can be utilized to update PBPK models established
earlier. For example, in vivo data of the pharmacokinetic changes of an investigational drug by a
strong enzyme inhibitor can be used to evaluate and update the PBPK model. Subsequently, the
updated model may be used to simulate the effect of a less potent inhibitor or the effect of the same
strong inhibitor under different dosing regimens. Depending on how well the interaction effect needs to
be estimated, the simulation results may be used to support labelling. At all stages, PBPK modelling
and simulations can be used to inform the design of in vivo DDI studies.
When using the PBPK modelling and simulation approach, several important issues need to be taken
into account regarding both the choice of structural models and the availability of drug-dependent
parameters. The report of the analysis should include detailed description of the structural models,
original source and justifications for both system- and drug-dependent parameters, model assumptions
and their physiological and biochemical plausibility, sensitivity analyses for relevant parameters, type
of error models etc. If possible, the data files used in the simulation (preferably including drug-
dependent parameters, the structure model and any simulation options chosen) should be submitted
as supplementary material. The PBPK model needs to be qualified for its purpose. In general, the
performance of the model needs to be supported by relevant in vivo data. The data needed in different
situations have been specified in relevant sections in this document.

## Page 33

Guideline on the investigation of drug interactions
CPMP/EWP/560/95/Rev. 1 Corr. 2** Page 33/59

5.6.  Presentation of in vivo study results in the study report
Individual data on pharmacokinetic parameters should be listed with and without co-administration of
the interacting drug. Standard descriptive statistics for each treatment group, including arithmetic
mean, and standard deviation or geometric mean and CV, as well as range should be provided for the
pharmacokinetic parameters. The parameters representing drug exposure (e.g. Cmax and AUC) could
be presented as box-whiskers-plots with and without concomitant medication. The plots should include
the individual data points either overlaid or next to the boxes. A comparison of the individual
pharmacokinetic parameters with and without concomitant medication should also be presented
graphically e.g. as spaghetti-plots connecting the data points with and without co-administration within
each individual. All subjects or patients who have been included in the study, who have received both
study treatments and who have evaluable data-sets of PK and/or PD readouts should be included in
the statistical analysis of PK and/or PD parameters. However, if a subject has dropped out from the
study or has no measurable plasma concentration during a treatment period and this may be due to
the interaction, this should be taken into account in the evaluation. If the sampling is incomplete due
to an adverse even related drop out, as much data as possible should be collected to estimate the
subject´s drug exposure. Exclusion of subjects for other reasons than the ones given above should be
well justified and preferably be specified in the study protocol. When indicated, the interaction effect
should be presented with and without the individual proposed for exclusion. The interaction effect
should be calculated and the change in relevant pharmacokinetic parameters presented. Individual
changes in pharmacokinetic parameters should be listed together with descriptive statistics, including
the 90% confidence interval and the 95% prediction interval for the interaction effect.
If the pharmacokinetics of active metabolites has been investigated, the data should be presented in a
similar way for the metabolites. If suitable, the active moiety, i.e. the total exposure of active species,
estimated as the sum of the unbound exposure of pharmacological equivalents, should be presented in
addition to the effects on the separate substances. However, this estimation is only correct if the
distributions of parent drug and metabolite to the target site(s) are similar. The validity of this
assumption should be discussed based on data on permeability/lipophilicity etc and, if possible, the
calculations should be modified by the metabolite to parent target organ distribution ratio. If the
protein binding of parent and metabolite(s) is high, it is recommended to determine the protein binding
in the same study so as not to introduce inter-study variability.
5.7.  Translation into treatment recommendations
The consequences of an observed in vivo (or in vitro) interaction should be assessed and suitable
treatment recommendations or warnings given. The mechanistic information gained from the
interaction studies should be used to predict other interactions and suitable recommendations should
be made for the predicted interactions.
5.7.1.  In vitro data
If positive in vitro studies have not been followed by in vivo studies although in vitro data indicate risk
of an in vivo effect, e.g. in cases where in vivo probe drugs are not available or drug interaction
studies not practically possible or have not been conducted, or if an interaction of non-studied enzymes
and transporters is expected based on mechanistic knowledge (e.g. co-regulated enzymes and
transporters affected by induction), the potential implications should be discussed based on available
scientific literature, and if possible, translated into treatment recommendations.

## Page 34

Guideline on the investigation of drug interactions
CPMP/EWP/560/95/Rev. 1 Corr. 2** Page 34/59

5.7.2.  In vivo effects of other drugs on the investigational drug
The clinical relevance of the effects of the studied drugs on the pharmacokinetics of the investigational
drug should be assessed and the results used to predict the effects of other drugs where a similar
interaction by the same mechanism can be expected. As described in section 5.2.3, if there are drugs
that have a weaker effect on the investigational drug, separate studies should preferably have been
performed if the expected interaction is likely to be clinically relevant. If such studies are lacking, the
pharmacokinetic consequences of the interaction should, if possible, be predicted and the clinical
relevance assessed. The prediction could be based on the difference in inhibition potential between the
drugs and the effect of the drug with the most potent effect. Mechanistic models can be used to
support these predictions.
Treatment recommendations should ensure that patients receive drug treatment which is effective and
safe. The evaluation should be based on information available on the relationship between exposure
and efficacy/safety. If possible, a target range, i.e. a well justified target range for relevant exposure
parameters should be presented for the investigational drug, specifying what change in exposure
would justify a posology adjustment. If the target range is based on drug exposure in patients and the
interaction study was performed in healthy volunteers, potential differences in the pharmacokinetics
between patients and healthy volunteers needs to be considered. The observed exposure (box-
whiskers plots including individual data), should be analysed with respect to target criteria taking into
account  the frequency of subjects in the interaction study with lower as well as higher exposure than
the target range and the clinical consequences of these deviations. For individually dose-titrated drugs,
the data should be analysed with respect to relative individual increase or decrease in exposure. If the
inter-individual variability in interaction effect is especially important and the interaction study is
deemed too small to estimate this variability satisfactory, PBPK simulations may be performed to
estimate the range of interaction effect if the model well predicts the outcome of the in vivo study.
If a marked interaction is observed and a dose adjustment proposed, it is recommended that the
resulting relevant individual exposure parameters are estimated in support of the proposed dose
adjustment and the estimated exposure is evaluated with respect to target criteria as above. Unless
the drug has a large therapeutic window, it is recommended that the plasma concentration-time curves
obtained with the dose adjustment are simulated.
Presence of active metabolites should be considered when proposing dose adjustments . When relevant,
the active moiety can be used to develop dose adjustment (see section 5.6). However, increased
exposure must also be considered from a safety perspective and the exposure of all relevant active
substances should as far as possible be within a well tolerated range after dose adjustment. If dose
adjusting for the effects by an inducing drug, the consequences of the potential increase in exposure of
pharmacologically active metabolites formed through the induced pathway(s), should be discussed.
When an alteration in dosing frequency is considered instead of adjusting the daily dose due to the lack
of appropriate strength(s) available of the pharmaceutical form, adequate support is needed to show
that the pharmacokinetic parameters likely to be relevant for efficacy and safety do not deviate in a
clinically relevant manner from the conditions for which satisfactory clinical efficacy and safety has
been established.
If proposing a dose-adjustment based on Cmin (either during the evaluation of a general dose
adjustment or if proposing a dose-adjustment within the subject based on Cmin), the possibility of an
altered relationship between Cmin and AUC should be considered if the systemic elimination of the
drug is changed.

## Page 35

Guideline on the investigation of drug interactions
CPMP/EWP/560/95/Rev. 1 Corr. 2** Page 35/59

If the interaction is time-dependent, the time course needs to be taken into account in the
development of dosage recommendations. Different recommendations might be needed at different
time points both after initiating and ending treatment with the perpetrator.
If the interaction is expected to have severe consequences and there is no possibility of normalising
the exposure through dose adjustment, the drug combination should be avoided. The benefit –risk of
the combination should be included in the evaluation e.g. some combinations may be necessary even
at increased risk. If the consequences of the interaction are not severe and/or considered manageable
through additional safety or efficacy monitoring, this should be clearly recommended in the SmPC. As
clear advice as possible on the practical management of the situation should be given.
An additional solution for management of drug interactions is Therapeutic Drug Monitoring (TDM). TDM
is particularly useful if there is a large variability in interaction effect by a commonly used concomitant
drug/group of drugs that necessitates individual dose adjustment. This approach is mainly applicable if
there is a well established therapeutic concentration window. However, TDM may also be used to aid
dose adjustment of drugs for which the target concentration differs between individuals, setting the
individual baseline concentration (prior to the interaction) as target concentration. If TDM is
recommended, advice on sampling days and times should be given in the SmPC. Additionally, the need
for non-TDM guided dose adjustment on the first treatment days should be discussed.
Treatment recommendations should include recommendations for patients who have certain
characteristics leading to a different interaction effect and who may have specific important
interactions. If pharmacogenetic testing is not performed before the combination treatment is started,
the recommendation for all patients should also be suitable for the subpopulation. In addition,
combinations of drugs leading to inhibition of multiple pathways should be considered and treatment
recommendations included.
5.7.3.  In vivo effects of the investigational drug on other drugs
The evaluation of the effects of the investigational drug on other drugs includes:
• evaluation of results of studies investigating the effects of the investigational drug on probe
drugs
• mechanism-based extrapolation of observed effects to other drugs
• evaluation of the results of studies on specific drug combinations to provide combination-
specific treatment recommendations.
Interactions studied with the probe drugs are mainly intended for the evaluation of the extent of
inhibition or induction of an enzyme or transporter by the investigational drug. The data is used to
predict interactions with other drugs which are substrates for the same enzyme or transporter. The
clinical relevance of the effect on exposure of the probe drug per se is evaluated, but more focus is
often put on absence or presence of an effect and the magnitude of the mean effect.
In vivo enzyme inhibitors and inducers should, if possible, be classified as either mild, moderate or
strong inhibitors or inducers (See Appendix VIII). The induction results are qualitatively extrapolated
to co-regulated enzymes and transporters if induction of these proteins has not been quantified in vivo.
Based on the in vivo inhibition and induction studies with the probe drugs, other drugs which are
substrates for the enzyme/transporter and likely to be affected in a clinically significant manner should
be discussed and adequate treatment recommendations presented.

## Page 36

Guideline on the investigation of drug interactions
CPMP/EWP/560/95/Rev. 1 Corr. 2** Page 36/59

5.7.4.  Food effects
If food interaction studies indicate that there should be specific recommendations on how to take the
drug in relation to food, clear information about this should be given in the SmPC. Whether such a
recommendation is needed and what the recommendation should be depends on intra- and inter-
individual variability, potential recommendations regarding concomitant food intake in the pivotal
clinical phase III studies, as well as the relationship between concentration and effect of the drug. This
is further described in section 5.1. Recommended wordings for recommendations regarding food intake
are given in Appendix IX.
6.  Herbal medicinal products and specific food products
Information about interactions between medicinal products and herbal medicinal products or specific
food products such as grapefruit juice is usually based on the scientific literature and translated into
general recommendations regarding use of the food products or herbal products containing a specific
component. The interaction potential of one specific herbal medicinal product or food product is difficult
to extrapolate to other products produced from the same raw source material. Usually, the interacting
substances have not been sufficiently well identified, and therefore analysis of the product contents
may not be used to make safe extrapolation of the magnitude of the interaction effect. For new herbal
preparations the potential for interactions should be investigated by the applicant. For traditional and
well-established herbal preparations the potential for interaction should be clarified if reports point to
clinically relevant interactions in humans
Usually there are no data on the pharmacokinetics of the constituents of herbal preparations or herbal
substances and consequently the in vivo relevance of in vitro data cannot be assessed. However, if
available in vivo information indicates that herbal preparations or the constituents of the herbal
preparation may give rise to clinically relevant drug-interactions, in vitro studies on the enzyme
inhibitory potential of the constituents or the herbal preparations are encouraged as such studies may
facilitate the setting of causal relationship and appropriate specifications. In case an in vivo interaction
study is not performed with a certain herbal preparation, available information on other preparations of
the herbal component(s) may be extrapolated to its labelling as a precautionary measure. To obtain
product specific information in the labelling of a specific herbal product, an in vivo drug interaction
study with that product should be considered. Such interaction studies should involve probe drugs if
appropriate.
If there is a need to investigate the effect of a herbal medicinal product or a special kind of food (e.g.
grapefruit juice) on the pharmacokinetics of a medicinal product in order to substantiate the
information about the interaction in the SmPC, effort should be made to choose a specific herbal or
food product and mode of intake of the product known to give a marked interaction effect. Inclusion of
a probe drug in the study, i.e. a drug shown to interact with the herbal or food component, could be
considered to verify the sensitivity of the study. The magnitude of the interaction could be given in the
SmPC of the medicinal product but together with information on the difficulty to extrapolate the
magnitude to other herbal medicinal products or food products based on the same components.
7.  Inclusion of information and recommendations in the
 SmPC
The guideline on summary of product characteristics (SmPC) (September 2009 – Eudralex vol. 2C)
gives advice on how to present information about interactions.

## Page 37

Guideline on the investigation of drug interactions
CPMP/EWP/560/95/Rev. 1 Corr. 2** Page 37/59

Information about drug interactions should be presented in the SmPC sections 4.5 and 5.2 (e.g. for
food-interactions) and cross-referred to the sections 4.2, 4.3 or 4.4 if relevant. Section 4.5 should
contain all detailed information on drug interactions and only the recommendation should be given in
the cross-referred sections.
In section 4.5 interactions affecting the investigational drug should be given first, followed by
interactions resulting in effects on other drugs. In these subsections, the order of presentation should
be contraindicated combinations, those where concomitant use is not recommended, followed by
others. The text should be as mechanistically clear as possible to enable mechanism-based prediction
of interactions with drugs not mentioned in the text.
Clear treatment recommendations should be given to the prescriber. Wording such as “caution is
advised” should be avoided in favour of a recommendation on proposed actions. If a drug combination
is stated to be “not recommended”, practical recommendations should be presented in case
concomitant treatment may not be avoided. The need for time-specific information and
recommendations should be considered. Such situations include interactions where the time interval
between perpetrator and victim drug administration is of particular importance and a certain time-
interval between administrations have been studied, time dependent interactions such as induction or
mechanism based inhibition, drugs with long half-lives, etc. The estimated course of onset of the
interaction as well as the time-course after ending concomitant treatment should be given as well as,
when relevant, time-specific recommendations. If it is likely that the interaction effect would be
different with another dose or at another time point than the one studied, this should be reflected in
the recommendations.
Information on absence of interactions (supported by in vivo data) could be reported briefly if
considered of interest to the prescriber.
In special circumstances, where there are very limited therapeutic alternatives due to marked
interactions with most drugs of the same class, examples of less interacting drugs could be given as
assistance for the prescriber.
When relevant, the interaction potential in specific populations, such as children or patients with
impaired renal function, should be addressed.
7.1.  Mechanistic information and prediction of non-studied interactions
Brief information about the major enzymes involved in the elimination of the drug, transporters with a
major impact on absorption, distribution or elimination of the drug as well as effects of the
investigational drug on enzymes and transporters should be summarised in section 4.5 as a
mechanistic basis for the interaction information. Similarly, if it has been shown that the investigational
drug inhibits or induces enzymes and transporters in vivo, this information should be presented along
with the potency as inhibitor and/or inducer according to Appendix VIII. The classification should be
clarified by giving an estimation of how much the systemic exposure sensitive substrates of the
enzyme/transporters could be affected by the investigational product. Based on the mechanistic
knowledge, the results of interaction studies should be extrapolated to other drugs. It is recommended
to include a list of drugs likely to be affected to a clinically relevant extent in the SmPC to assist the
prescriber. The list should be as extensive as possible and it should be indicated that the list probably
does not cover all relevant drugs. In some instances such a list may be too long, such as when the
investigational drug affects a very important drug metabolising enzyme (e.g. CYP3A4). In this case,
drugs should be selected for inclusion based on the severity of the clinical consequences of the
interaction. e.g. “Drug X is a strong inhibitor of CYP3A and may therefore markedly increase the
systemic exposure of drugs metabolised by this enzyme such as …” The most important drugs from a

## Page 38

Guideline on the investigation of drug interactions
CPMP/EWP/560/95/Rev. 1 Corr. 2** Page 38/59

clinical relevance perspective should be included in such a list to aid the prescriber. If in vitro data
indicate that a medicinal product affects an enzyme or a transporter but the available scientific
knowledge does not allow predictions of interactions in vivo, it is recommended to include the in vitro
information in the SmPC Section 5.2 for future use.
7.2.  Presentation of study results in the SmPC
The results of relevant studies should be presented as mean effect on the most important exposure
parameter. In specific cases where considered relevant for the prescriber, the variability of the effect
can be given. Results of interaction studies used to predict other drug-interactions on a mechanistic
basis e.g. interaction studies with probe drugs as victim drugs, should be included, even if the
interaction effect is not clinically relevant for the specific victim drug studied. Brief, condensed
information on the study design needed for the interpretation of those particular study results should
be included if it is of value to the prescriber. Such information may include dose (in case a dose range
is used for the interacting drugs or if the therapeutic dose has not been used in the study), as well as
timing and duration of treatment (if a time-dependent interaction has been investigated but full
induction has not been obtained). In case the interaction effect may be significantly different with a
different dose or when the full time-dependent interaction has been obtained, this should be stated in
the SmPC. Information on study design that is not of use to the prescriber should not be included in
the text. The conclusions of in vitro studies indicating an effect on other drugs should be presented if
no in vivo information is available. However, otherwise, the conclusions of in vitro studies should be
reported in section 5.2.
The effect of concomitant food intake on the pharmacokinetics should be presented in section 5.2 and
clear recommendations given in section 4.2 (see Appendix IX).
Definitions
Ae amount of parent drug excreted unchanged in urine
AhR  aryl hydrocarbon receptor
AUC  area under the plasma concentration-time curve
CAR  constitutive androstane receptor
BCRP  breast cancer resistance protein
BSEP  bile salt efflux pump
CAR  constitutive androstane receptor
Cavg  average concentration
CV coefficient of variation
CITCO:  (6-(4-chlorophenyl)imidazo[2,1-beta][1,3]thiazole-5-carbaldehyde-O-(3,4-
dichlorobenzyl)oxime)
Cmax peak concentration
Cmin trough concentration
CL clearance
ERL elimination rate limited (elimination)

## Page 39

Guideline on the investigation of drug interactions
CPMP/EWP/560/95/Rev. 1 Corr. 2** Page 39/59

fa  fraction absorbed
fu fraction unbound
GFR  glomerular filtration rate
GR  glucocorticoid receptor
ka  absorption rate constant.
Ki inhibition constant
KI  the inhibitor concentration producing half the maximal rate of inactivation
kinact maximum inactivation rate constant
MATE multidrug and toxin extrusion proteins
OAT organic anion transporter
OATP  organic anion transporting polypeptide
OCT  organic cation transporter
PEPT1 intestinal peptide transporter I
Pgp P-glycoprotein
PXR pregnane X receptor
Qent  enterocyte blood flow
SmPC summary of product characteristics
TDM therapeutic drug monitoring
Tmax time when Cmax occurs

## Page 40

Guideline on the investigation of drug interactions
CPMP/EWP/560/95/Rev. 1 Corr. 2** Page 40/59

Appendix I
Standard procedures for food interaction studies
A single-dose of the investigational drug is administered with 240 ml of water after a 10-hour fasting
period and 30 minutes after intake of a meal has been started. Except for the meal, the subjects
should refrain from food for at least 4 hours after dosing and all food -intake should be standardised
for at least 12 hours post-dose. The recommended composition of a high fat meal and a moderate
meal are described below. In case a single dose study may not be performed in healthy subjects or
patients, a multiple-dose, steady state study with administration of doses under fasting and fed
conditions, respectively may be satisfactory.
The standardised high-fat meal
The high fat meal should contain 800-1000 kcal with 500-600 kcal from fat and 250 kcal from
carbohydrates. A typical standard test meal can be two eggs fried in butter, two strips of bacon, two
slices of toast with butter, 120 ml of hash brown potatoes and 240 ml of whole milk. Substitutions in
this test meal can be made as long as the meal provides similar amounts of calories from protein,
carbohydrate, and fat and has comparable meal volume and viscosity.
The moderate meal
The moderate meal could contain approximately 400-500 kcal with fat contributing to ca. 150 kcal.

## Page 41

Guideline on the investigation of drug interactions
CPMP/EWP/560/95/Rev. 1 Corr. 2** Page 41/59

Appendix II
In vitro investigations of involvement of transporters in drug absorption and determinations
of the apparent permeability constant
The in vitro investigation of transporter involvement at an intestinal level usually begins with Caco-2
experiments. In these cells, the intestinal permeability may also be qualitatively assessed. Several
transporters may be present in the Caco-2 cells. Other in vitro systems may be used as well to
investigate transporter involvement and may have advantages depending on if specific inhibitors are
available. This appendix focuses on Caco-2 cell studies, while other in vitro systems are discussed in
Appendix III.
The in vitro Caco-2 cell study needs to be performed under well-controlled conditions. The permeability
of the drug should be investigated in both directions, preferably under sink conditions (the
concentration on the receiver side is less than 10% of the concentration on the donor side) unless the
absence of sink-conditions is compensated for in the calculations. At least four different physiologically
relevant concentrations should be studied. For intestinal transport the studied range could be 0.01 to
1-fold the dose/250 ml unless solubility limits the concentration range.
To verify adequate expression of Pgp in the cells, a positive control, i.e. an adequate Pgp probe
substance, should be investigated and its permeability ratio found sufficiently high based on published
literature. Presence of adequate expression of other transporters, such as BCRP, PEPT-1, etc could be
investigated in a similar manner if there are indications based on physiochemical properties or
knowledge on similar substances that these transporters could be involved.
It is recommended that a pH of 7.4 is used on both sides when efflux is investigated. If a proton
gradient is needed to investigate the involvement of a certain transporter, the degree of ionisation and
likely influence on the study results should be discussed. Determination of mass-balance (% recovery
of the applied amount of drug in the receiver and donor side) is recommended unless the absorption
predicted from the in vitro data is complete. The conditions on both sides of the membrane/cells
should be as similar as possible. Thus if plasma protein/albumin is added, it should be added on both
sides, so as not to influence the permeation of drug over the membrane. The impact of solubility,
organic solvents used, potential degradation and metabolism of the drug substance in vitro on study
results should be discussed.
In Caco-2 cell studies, the permeation of drug from the apical (A) to the basolateral (B) side of the
cells is compared with the permeation in the opposite direction (B to A). If the ratio of the B to A and A
to B permeation is > 2 or < 0.5, this suggests involvement of an efflux transporter, or an active uptake
transporter, respectively.
If intestinal active transport is concluded, the permeability in the absence of transporters could be
taken into account, estimating the importance of the transporter for drug absorption. To estimate the
permeability in the absence of transporters, the permeability constant is determined at concentrations
high enough to completely saturate the transporters (assessed as an B to A/A to B ratio of 0.5 – 2). If
this is not possible, e.g. due to cell toxicity or insufficient solubility, inhibitors of the transporters may
be used. If this approach is chosen, it should be established that the cell-layer is unaffected. The
investigation should include a well validated, high and low permeable reference substance (e.g.
metroprolol and mannitol). If the permeability in the absence of transporters is high (≥ the
permeability constant of the highly permeable drug metoprolol), the effect of active drug transport will
be negligible as compared to the passive, concentration-gradient driven, absorption of the drug.

## Page 42

Guideline on the investigation of drug interactions
CPMP/EWP/560/95/Rev. 1 Corr. 2** Page 42/59

If there are indications that the active transport may be of clinical importance, attempts should be
made to identify the transporter. In the Caco-2 cell study, this is usually investigated by determining
the permeability rate and ratio with and without adding a selective inhibitor to the cells.
The use of Caco-2 cell permeability is presently semi-quantitative as described above. Use of multiple
controls in combination with well established permeability ranges for each control may make
quantitative prediction possible in the future. It is also possible that other in vitro systems may be
used. In these cases, the system should have been validated for its use.

## Page 43

Guideline on the investigation of drug interactions
CPMP/EWP/560/95/Rev. 1 Corr. 2** Page 43/59

Appendix III
In vitro studies identifying transporters involved in drug disposition
The identification of which transporter is involved in an identified uptake or efflux process affecting
drug disposition may be done in vitro through transport studies intended to isolate the effect of a
specific transporter.
In vitro studies investigating drug transport with and without presence of the specific transporter
activity are usually the first steps in the identification process. There are several systems available as
well as several ways of modulating the transporter activity. These presently include but are not limited
to: (over-)expressing the transporter in vector systems and comparing to normal vectors, using
selective inhibitors to inhibit one specific transporter, inhibiting transporter expression either by
knocking out the gene or through the use of silencing mRNA, etc. The choice of in vitro system used
should be justified based on scientific literature and on the physiochemical properties, such as
membrane permeability of the substance. It is recommended to use an in vitro system where the
human in vivo transport functions of the transporter are preserved. The concentration range of
investigational drug should be relevant to the site of transport. Thus, if involvement of the transporter
is possible at sites exposed to markedly different concentrations, e.g., such as Pgp potentially involved
in the intestine as well as the kidneys/liver/blood-brain barrier, different concentration ranges needs to
be studied. The concentration interval studied should cover a ca 100-fold difference in concentration
and should have as therapeutically plausible concentration as possible in the middle of the range. The
choice of concentration range should be justified. At least 4 different concentration of the
investigational drug should be tested. In contrast to the transporter inhibition assays, it is important
not to study too high concentrations as this may saturate transporters active at lower concentrations.
To validate the assay, the study should include known substrates investigated with and without the
transporter activity. The choice of controls and inhibitors should be justified by appropriate scientific
references or in house data. The specificity requirements for inhibitors used are dependent on whether
other transporters are present in the in vitro system.
The in vitro studies will investigate whether the investigational drug can be transported by the
transport protein. However, in case there is no in vivo data to support the potential quantitative
importance of the transporter, making a quantitative estimate of the potential influence of the
transporter on the pharmacokinetics of the drug is presently difficult. For hepatically eliminated drugs
potentially subject to hepatic uptake transport, an attempt to assess the in vivo importance of the
transporter could be made by determining the uptake into hepatocytes with or without inhibitor or
saturation of the transporter. In such an investigation, controls need to certify that adequate amount
of the uptake transporter activity is present in the cells. In the future, this may be a possible approach
but at present, the applicant is encouraged to follow the literature and to apply a scientific approach.

## Page 44

Guideline on the investigation of drug interactions
CPMP/EWP/560/95/Rev. 1 Corr. 2** Page 44/59

Appendix IV
In vitro investigations of which enzymes are catalysing the main elimination pathways
The metabolism of an investigational drug, and the formation and metabolism of clinically relevant
active metabolites, is usually first investigated through in vitro incubations with human liver
microsomes (HLMs), hepatocytes, recombinant cells expressing human liver enzymes, liver S9
fractions etc, depending on which enzymes are investigated. CYP and UGT enzymes are present in all
systems mentioned (recombinant cells usually express only one single enzyme). Cytosolic enzymes
such as sulphotransferases, glutathione transferases, aldehyde dehydrogenase and alcohol
dehydrogenase etc are present in S9 fractions and hepatocytes. Hepatocytes may also express
transporters to some extent. The in vitro system(s) used should be carefully considered when
interpreting study results. The in vitro metabolism studies should be performed at therapeutically
relevant concentrations under linear conditions. In multi-enzyme systems, enzyme specific inhibitors
(see table 2) are added to evaluate the contribution of separate enzymes to the metabolism of the
investigational drug. In cases where the inhibitor is not sufficiently specific, it is recommended to
perform the study in an in vitro system where no other CYPs than the particular enzyme is expressed.
Specific antibodies may be used instead of inhibitors if the specificity is adequately supported. The
metabolism may be investigated as rate of disappearance of drug and/or as formation of metabolites.
If possible, it is recommended to follow metabolite formation to enable the identification of the
metabolic pathway catalysed by a particular enzyme. It is recommended to include positive controls
(marker substrates) for enzyme activity in the studies. Correlation studies, correlating a certain
enzyme activity (probe substrate metabolism) with the metabolism of the investigational drug, is of
less value than in vitro studies with inhibitors due to the often seen correlation between enzyme
activities of different enzymes. If the main enzymes involved in the in vitro metabolism are identified,
one in vitro system may be enough for this investigation. However, it is generally recommended to
verify the results by performing studies in another in vitro system. If no or little metabolism is
observed in vitro but is present in vivo, effort should be made based on structure and published data
to find an in vitro system with which the enzyme involved may be identified. In table 2 and 3 examples
of well validated specific inhibitors and marker reactions/substrates are given. Please check the
available literature regarding which concentration to use in the in vitro incubations.
The in vitro data are combined with in vivo data such as results from an in vivo mass-balance study
(see Appendix V) with investigational drug in order to predict which elimination pathways are the main
pathways in vivo.

## Page 45

Guideline on the investigation of drug interactions
CPMP/EWP/560/95/Rev. 1 Corr. 2** Page 45/59

Table 2 Examples of well validated inhibitors of specific enzyme activities in vitro
ENZYME INHIBITOR
CYP1A2 furafylline
CYP2B6* ticlopidine, thiotepa
CYP2C8 montelukast
CYP2C9 sulfaphenazole
CYP2C19* -(-)-N-3-benzyl-phenobarbital , nootkatone, loratadine
CYP2D6 quinidine
CYP3A ketoconazole, itraconazole
*presently no specific inhibitor known for in vitro use. Listed inhibitor(s) are not specific but can be
used together with other information or in a mono-enzyme system.

## Page 46

Guideline on the investigation of drug interactions
CPMP/EWP/560/95/Rev. 1 Corr. 2** Page 46/59

Appendix V
Identifying and quantifying the main elimination pathways in vivo using the mass balance
study
The drug is administered with a radioactive label in a metabolically stable position. In some cases two
separate labelling positions have to be used to follow the fate of the investigational drug. If there are
no dose- or time-dependencies in the first-pass metabolism or elimination of the drug, a single dose
study is sufficient. If the elimination is nonlinear, the design and degree of saturation should mimic the
therapeutic situation. For drugs with dose-dependent elimination and significant accumulation under
multiple-dosing, it should be considered to administer the radiolabelled single dose when steady state
has been obtained with unlabelled drug. Alternatively, a supratherapeutic single dose could be used.
The steady state dosing approach is also suitable if there drug has time-dependent pharmacokinetics.
In the mass-balance study, the systemic exposure of parent drug and metabolites in relation to total
exposure of radioactive material is obtained as well as the excretion of parent drug and metabolites in
urine and faeces. A longer half-life of radioactivity than for parent compound indicate metabolites with
slower, ERL (elimination rate limited), elimination. Effort should be made to identify as much of the
dose related material as possible. It is generally recommended that metabolites contributing to > 10%
of the AUC of drug related material (e.g. radioactivity in a well performed mass-balance study) are
structurally characterised. Preferably total recovery of radioactivity in urine and faeces should exceed
90% of the dose and more than 80% of the recovered radioactivity be identified.
A likely metabolism schedule is proposed based on knowledge of possible metabolic reactions and
metabolites observed in the study. The quantitative contribution of the different elimination pathways
are estimated based on the amount of dose excreted as primary and secondary metabolites along
specific routes. The contribution of primary pathways to total drug elimination (including first-pass) is
estimated as the sum of amounts found in excreta of all metabolites originating from one primary
pathway divided by the dose or total amount of drug related material found in excreta if considered
more suitable. If a significant amount of unchanged drug is found in faeces and it may not be verified
that this is originating from biliary (or gut wall) secretion, the denominator in the calculation should be
the amount of drug related material found in excreta subtracted by the amount of unchanged drug
found in faeces. This will constitute a worst case estimation from this respect of the contribution of the
different (primary) elimination pathway.
The estimation above based on oral mass-balance data is a rough estimation of the importance of
elimination pathways. The presence of first-pass metabolism or poor absorption may lead to both
under- and over-estimations of the importance of an elimination pathway for the clearance of a drug.
Information on oral bioavailability adds important information for understanding the role of biliary
and/or gutwall secretion to drug elimination if a large fraction of the drug is found unchanged in faeces.
(The i.v. clearance data gained may also be used to estimate the contribution of hepatic first-pass to
an incomplete bioavailability.) If there are indications that the bioavailability is markedly formulation
dependent, the likely bioavailability of the formulation used in the mass-balance study should be
discussed.
If there is first-pass metabolism, i.v. mass-balance data can provide a true estimate of the contribution
of the elimination pathways to drug clearance. Therefore, if an i.v. formulation can be produced, the
added knowledge obtained by an i.v. mass-balance study should carefully be considered.
Contribution of pathways to active metabolite elimination is estimated in a similar way based on the
ratio of the amount of a secondary metabolite originating from the active metabolite found in excreta
divided by the total sum of secondary metabolites of the active metabolite excreted plus any active
metabolite excreted unchanged. Usually, only one pathway contributes to active metabolite formation

## Page 47

Guideline on the investigation of drug interactions
CPMP/EWP/560/95/Rev. 1 Corr. 2** Page 47/59

but in some cases, more than one pathway is involved. If possible, a similar approach may be used in
these circumstances.
If the pharmacokinetics of the drug is linear in the therapeutic dose range, the mass-balance data can
be extrapolated from the dose of the mass-balance study to any dose administered in the range.
However, in case the elimination shows dose-dependency, this should be considered when
extrapolating the data to other doses than the one administered in the mass-balance study. In addition,
if (oral) clearance under multiple-dose conditions is different from at single-dose conditions using the
same dose, extrapolation of the results to the steady state situation should be performed with caution
and investigation of mass-balance after a single radiolabelled dose at steady state conditions could be
considered.
When the quantitatively important metabolism pathways have been determined, in vitro and in vivo
studies will provide information supporting which enzymes or transport proteins mainly are involved in
these pathways. As the ability to predict interactions affecting the investigational drug is dependent on
the identification of these proteins, extensive studies may be needed in case less known enzymes are
involved.

## Page 48

Guideline on the investigation of drug interactions
CPMP/EWP/560/95/Rev. 1 Corr. 2** Page 48/59

Appendix VI
Table 3 Examples of strong inhibitors of specific enzyme activities in vivo
ENZYME INHIBITOR
CYP1A2 enoxacine
CYP2B6 ticlopidine
CYP2C8 gemfibrozil
CYP2C9 fluconazole*
CYP2C19 omeprazole*
CYP2D6 quinidine, paroxetine, fluoxetine
CYP3A itraconazole, ketoconazole, ritonavir, clarithromycin
*moderate/weak inhibitors as no strong inhibitors are presently available or suitable for in vivo use. If
possible, investigating the effect of pharmacogenetics may be preferable for quantifying enzyme
contribution.

## Page 49

Guideline on the investigation of drug interactions
CPMP/EWP/560/95/Rev. 1 Corr. 2** Page 49/59

Appendix VII
In vitro marker reactions for specific enzymes
The investigation of enzyme inhibitory potency usually starts with in vitro investigations of the
inhibitory effect of certain marker reactions. These reactions should be selectively catalysed by the
enzyme investigated. Below are examples of well validated marker reactions.
Table 4 Examples of well validated enzyme marker reactions in vitro
ENZYME MARKER REACTION
CYP1A2 phenacetin O-deethylation
CYP2B6 efavirenz  hydroxylation, bupropion hydroxylation
CYP2C8 paclitaxel 6-hydroxylation, amodiaquine N-deethylation
CYP2C9 S-warfarin 7-hydroxylation, diclofenac 4´-hydroxylation
CYP2C19 S-mephenytoin 4´-hydroxylation
CYP2D6 bufuralol 1´-hydroxylation
CYP3A midazolam 1-hydroxylation and testosterone 6β-hydroxylation*
*CYP3A inhibition should be investigated using both marker reactions

Probe drugs for in vivo use
A probe drug is a drug which is metabolised mainly through one enzyme in vivo. The relative enzyme
contribution to the (oral) clearance of the probe drug should be supported by well performed in vivo
studies. Below is a list of probe drugs for use in interaction studies. Other probe drugs may be used if
justified through available scientific literature. In induction studies the importance of specificity, i.e. the
risk of overestimation of the induction potential of a specific enzyme due to induction of parallel
pathways, should be considered.
Table 5 Examples of probe drugs
ENZYME PROBE DRUG
CYP1A2 theophylline, caffeine
CYP2B6* efavirenz, S-bupropion (hydroxylation)
CYP2C8* amodiaquine (N-deethylation), repaglinide
CYP2C9 S-warfarin, tolbutamide
CYP2C19* omeprazole (single dose)
CYP2D6 metoprolol, desipramine
CYP3A midazolam**
*There is no well-documented probe-drug at present but these alternatives may be used (See section
5.4.2). Well validated probe drugs of these enzymes may be established in the future and it is
advisable to follow the scientific literature.

## Page 50

Guideline on the investigation of drug interactions
CPMP/EWP/560/95/Rev. 1 Corr. 2** Page 50/59

** Midazolam should be used regardless of which CYP3A4 marker reaction was associated with the
lowest Ki in vitro. In the future, a structure based choice of probe drug and structure/correlation-based
interaction predictions may be possible.

## Page 51

Guideline on the investigation of drug interactions
CPMP/EWP/560/95/Rev. 1 Corr. 2** Page 51/59

Appendix VIII
Classification of inhibitors and inducers according to potency.
Enzyme inhibitors may be classified based on their potency, i.e. magnitude of the mean effect on mean
oral clearance of a probe drug for the enzyme when the inhibitor is administered at its highest
therapeutic dose. A strong inhibitor causes a > 5 fold increase in the plasma AUC values or ≥ 80%
decrease in oral clearance, a moderate inhibitor causes a > 2-fold increase in the plasma AUC or 50 -
≤ 80% inhibition of oral clearance, a mild inhibitor causes 1.25 to 2 fold increase in the plasma AUC or
≤ 50% inhibition of oral clearance. Depending on the probe drug used and its bioavailability, the
increase in AUC may be different. This is especially the case for substrates of the CYP3A subfamily, due
to varying extent of intestinal first-pass metabolism. Therefore oral midazolam is recommended when
classifying a drug as a CYP3A inhibitor.
Inducers of CYP3A should be classified based on the effect on oral midazolam clearance or plasma AUC.
A ≤ 50%, > 50 - ≤ 80% and > 80% reduction in midazolam AUC after oral administration classifies an
investigational drug as mild, moderate and strong inducer, respectively. Induction of other enzymes,
should if possible, be classified in a similar way if the effect was investigated using an orally
administered probe drug metabolised practically exclusively by that enzyme.
The dose-dependency of both classifications should be remembered, and if a dose range is
recommended for the investigational drug, additional studies reflecting the effect of lower doses may
be needed.
The potency classification of a drug should be presented in the SmPC together with the magnitude of
interaction effect observed.

## Page 52

Guideline on the investigation of drug interactions
CPMP/EWP/560/95/Rev. 1 Corr. 2** Page 52/59

Appendix IX
Preferred SmPC wordings for recommendations regarding food intake
The effect of concomitant food intake on the pharmacokinetics should be presented in section 5.2 and
clear recommendations given in section 4.2. These are the preferred wordings in recommendations
regarding drug intake in relation to meals:
[Medicinal product] can be taken with or without meals.
[Medicinal product] should be taken on an empty stomach, at least X hours before or X hours after a
meal.
[Medicinal product] should be taken on an empty stomach 1 hour before breakfast
[Medicinal product] should be taken together with a meal.
[Medicinal product] should be taken with a light meal.

## Page 53

Guideline on the investigation of drug interactions
CPMP/EWP/560/95/Rev. 1 Corr. 2** Page 53/59

Appendix X
Decision trees

## Page 54

Guideline on the investigation of drug interactions
CPMP/EWP/560/95/Rev. 1 Corr. 2**
Page 54/59

1

## Page 55

Guideline on the investigation of drug interactions
CPMP/EWP/560/95/Rev. 1 Corr. 2**
Page 55/59

 2

## Page 56

Guideline on the investigation of drug interactions
CPMP/EWP/560/95/Rev. 1 Corr. 2**
Page 56/59

 3

## Page 57

Guideline on the investigation of drug interactions
CPMP/EWP/560/95/Rev. 1 Corr. 2**
Page 57/59

4

## Page 58

Guideline on the investigation of drug interactions
CPMP/EWP/560/95/Rev. 1 Corr. 2**
Page 58/59

5

## Page 59

Guideline on the investigation of drug interactions
CPMP/EWP/560/95/Rev. 1 Corr. 2**
Page 59/59

 6
