# 4.FDA_Drug-Drug Interaction Assessment for Therapeutic Proteins_202306

## Page 1

Drug-Drug Interaction
Assessment for
Therapeutic Proteins
Guidance for Industry

U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
Food and Drug Administration
Center for Drug Evaluation and Research (CDER)
Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research (CBER)

June 2023
Clinical Pharmacology

## Page 2

Drug-Drug Interaction
Assessment for
Therapeutic Proteins
Guidance for Industry

Additional copies are available from:
Office of Communications, Division of Drug Information
Center for Drug Evaluation and Research
Food and Drug Administration
10001 New Hampshire Ave., Hillandale Bldg., 4th Floor
Silver Spring, MD 20993-0002
Phone: 855-543-3784 or 301-796-3400; Fax: 301-431-6353
Email: druginfo@fda.hhs.gov
https://www.fda.gov/drugs/guidance-compliance-regulatory-information/guidances-drugs
and/or
Office of Communication, Outreach and Development
Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research
 Food and Drug Administration
10903 New Hampshire Ave., Bldg. 71, Room 3128
Silver Spring, MD 20993-0002
Phone: 800-835-4709 or 240-402-8010
Email: ocod@fda.hhs.gov
https://www.fda.gov/vaccines-blood-biologics/guidance-compliance-regulatory-information-biologics/biologics-guidances

U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
Food and Drug Administration
Center for Drug Evaluation and Research (CDER)
Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research (CBER)

June 2023
Clinical Pharmacology

## Page 3

Contains Nonbinding Recommendations

i
TABLE OF CONTENTS

I. INTRODUCTION............................................................................................................. 1
II. CONSIDERATIONS FOR ASSESSING DDIS FOR THERAPEUTIC PROTEINS 2
III. TYPES OF DDI ASSESSMENTS AND STUDY DESIGN CONSIDERATIONS ..... 5
IV. LABELING RECOMMENDATIONS............................................................................ 7
V. APPENDIX. DECISION TREE ...................................................................................... 8

## Page 4

Contains Nonbinding Recommendations

 1
Drug-Drug Interaction Assessment for Therapeutic Proteins
Guidance for Industry1

This guidance represents the current thinking of the Food and Drug Administration (FDA or Agency) on
this topic.  It does not establish any rights for any person and is not binding on FDA or the public.  You
can use an alternative approach if it satisfies the requirements of the applicable statutes and regulations.
To discuss an alternative approach, contact the FDA office responsible for this guidance as listed on the
title page.

I. INTRODUCTION

The purpose of this guidance is to help sponsors of investigational new drug (IND) applications
and applicants of biologic license applications (BLAs) determine the need for drug-drug
interaction (DDI) studies for a therapeutic protein by providing recommendations for a
systematic, risk-based approach.
2,3

For this guidance, a therapeutic protein refers to a protein that is being developed for licensure,
or is licensed, as a biological product under section 351 of the Public Health Service Act (42
U.S.C. 262).
4,5 Therapeutic proteins include purified monoclonal antibodies, cytokines, enzymes,
and other novel proteins for in vivo use. Therapeutic proteins do not include proteins intended to
act as vaccines or allergenic products, cellular and gene therapy products, and/or human cells,
tissues, and cellular and tissue-based products.
5 Although this guidance applies to therapeutic
proteins, many of the general principles may be applicable to other biological products, such as
novel products regulated by CBER (e.g., cellular and gene therapies). Due to the evolving
knowledge of novel products, sponsors should consult corresponding review divisions for
detailed information regarding a specific DDI assessment.

1 This guidance has been prepared by the Office of Clinical Pharmacology in the Center for Drug Evaluation and
Research in collaboration with the Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research at the Food and Drug
Administration.

2 Schrieber SJ, EP Fletcher, XF Wang, YM Wang, S Sagoo, R Madabushi, SM Huang, and I Zineh, 2019,
Considerations for Biologic Product Drug–Drug Interactions: A Regulatory Perspective, Clin Pharmacol Ther,
105:1332-1334.

3 Hereafter, the term sponsors will refer to either applicants or sponsors.

4 Section 351 of the Public Health Service Act, 42 U.S.C. § 282.

5 More information on therapeutic proteins regulated by CDER and CBER can be found on the FDA web page
Transfer of Therapeutic Products to the Center for Drug Evaluation and Research available at:
https://www.fda.gov/combination-products/jurisdictional-information/transfer-therapeutic-biological-products-
center-drug-evaluation-and-research.

## Page 5

Contains Nonbinding Recommendations

 2

This guidance supplements the FDA guidances entitled In Vitro Drug Interaction Studies —
Cytochrome P450 Enzyme- and Transporter-Mediated Drug Interactions and Clinical Drug
Interaction Studies —  Cytochrome P450 Enzyme- and Transporter-Mediated Drug Interactions
(January 2020).6,7

In general, FDA’s guidance documents do not establish legally enforceable responsibilities.
Instead, guidances describe the Agency’s current thinking on a topic and should be viewed only
as recommendations, unless specific regulatory or statutory requirements are cited. The use of
the word should in Agency guidance means that something is suggested or recommended, but
not required.

II. CONSIDERATIONS FOR ASSESSING DDI
S FOR THERAPEUTIC PROTEINS

When evaluating the potential for a DDI between a therapeutic protein and small molecules or
between therapeutic proteins, sponsors should take into account various factors including the
potential mechanism for the interaction, disease type and severity (if the DDI mechanism is
related to the disease condition), biological product type, clearance pathways of the therapeutic
protein,
 and commonly co-administered drugs in the proposed patient population(s).8,9

Below are examples for which DDI studies of a therapeutic protein could be warranted. This list
is not all-inclusive, as the development of novel therapeutic proteins will continue to inform the
DDI risk. Also, refer to the decision tree in the Appendix.

A. Mechanisms Related to Proinflammatory Cytokines

Therapeutic proteins that are proinflammatory cytokines (e.g., peginterferon) or therapeutic
proteins that cause increases in proinflammatory cytokine levels (e.g., IL-6) can downregulate
the expression of cytochrome P450 (CYP) enzymes (e.g., blinatumomab), thereby decreasing the

6 For the most recent version of a guidance, check the FDA guidance web page at
https://www.fda.gov/RegulatoryInformation/Guidances/default.htm.

7 For recommendations on assessing the DDI potential of antibody-drug conjugates, please refer to the FDA draft
guidance entitled Clinical Pharmacology Considerations for Antibody-Drug Conjugates (February 2022). When
final, this guidance will represent the Agency’s current thinking on this topic.

8 Kraynov E, SW Martin, S Hurst, OA Fahmi, M Dowty, C Cronenberger, CM Loi, B Kuang, O Fields, S Fountain,
M Awwad, and D Wang, 2011, How Current Understanding of Clearance Mechanisms and Pharmacodynamics of
Therapeutic Proteins Can Be Applied for Evaluation of Their Drug-Drug Interaction Potential, Drug Metab and
Disp, 39:1779-1783.

9 Jing X, P Ji, SJ Schrieber, EP Fletcher, C Sahajwalla, 2020, Update on Therapeutic Protein-Drug Interaction:
Information in Labeling, Clin Pharmacokinet, 59:25-36.

## Page 6

Contains Nonbinding Recommendations

 3
metabolism of drugs that are CYP substrates and increasing their exposure levels.10 Conversely,
therapeutic proteins that reduce cytokine levels (e.g., TNF inhibitors) can relieve the CYP
downregulation from an inflammatory environment (e.g., rheumatoid arthritis), thereby
increasing CYP expression and activity and reducing exposure of drugs that are CYP substrates.

Although there are data suggesting potential effects of cytokines on transporters based on
information from in vitro assays or animal models, the translation to clinical significance is
unknown.11 Investigating the potential for DDIs between cytokines or products that modulate
cytokines and transporters in clinical studies will help inform risk mitigation strategies.

1. Therapeutic Protein is a Proinflammatory Cytokine

Sponsors should evaluate the DDI potential for therapeutic proteins that are proinflammatory
cytokines (see Appendix).

2. Therapeutic Protein is a Proinflammatory Cytokine Modulator

a. Therapeutic protein causes an increase in proinflammatory cytokine
levels

The increase in cytokine levels following administration of a therapeutic protein can be transient
or persistent. Transient elevation of cytokines might not lead to a clinically relevant interaction.
Sponsors should determine the time course and extent of any increase in cytokine levels in
clinical studies to inform whether a DDI study is warranted, the design of a study, and an
appropriate risk mitigation strategy, if necessary. If the sponsor determines that the DDI potential
of a therapeutic protein is low, the sponsor should discuss that with the appropriate FDA review
division and provide a justification for this determination (see Appendix).

b. Therapeutic protein modulates proinflammatory cytokines in conditions
associated with elevated cytokine levels

Levels of proinflammatory cytokines differ by disease and severity of disease, leading to
variability in CYP expression, which makes it challenging to design a DDI study that can be
extrapolated beyond the study population. Hence, the labeling for such proinflammatory
cytokine modulators should include language indicating the potential for a DDI in conditions
associated with elevated cytokine levels.

10 Lee J, L Zhang, AY Men, LA Kenna, and SM Huang, 2010, CYP-Mediated Drug-Therapeutic Protein
Interactions: Clinical Findings, Proposed Mechanisms and Regulatory Implications, Clin Pharmacokinet, 49:295-
310.

11 Cressman AM, V Petrovic, and M Piquette-Miller, 2012, Inflammation-mediated Changes in Drug Transporter
Expression/activity: Implications for Therapeutic Drug Response, Expert Rev Clin Pharmacol, 5:69-89.

## Page 7

Contains Nonbinding Recommendations

 4
Sponsors should provide justification for the exclusion of labeling language indicating the
potential for a DDI if the data support that the potential for clinically significant DDI is low.12,13
Examples for justifications could include a discussion of:

• DDI effects observed with other agents or the same agent in other disease states with
similar or more inflammatory burden

• Differences in exposure levels of sensitive CYP substrates in healthy subjects versus the
indicated population considering other covariates

• Magnitude of cytokine modulation by the therapeutic protein

Alternatively, sponsors can assess the DDI potential in a clinical study to further inform labeling.
The clinical study can be a stand-alone DDI study or a nested DDI study as part of a larger
clinical study in which the primary objective is not to evaluate DDIs (see section III.C). The
disease type and severity and dosage(s) are important considerations. If a therapeutic protein is
being developed for multiple indications, the potential for DDIs should be evaluated in patients
with the indication manifesting the most severe inflammatory burden.
12

B. Mechanisms Unrelated to Proinflammatory Cytokines

There are observed or postulated DDIs with therapeutic proteins that are not caused by
proinflammatory cytokines. Depending on the expected mechanism of the DDI, sponsors should
evaluate the effect of a therapeutic protein on other drugs or the effect of other drugs on the
therapeutic protein. Scenarios in which DDI evaluation should be considered include:

• A therapeutic protein that affects human physiological processes (e.g., GLP-1 receptor
agonists such as dulaglutide and albiglutide result in delayed gastric emptying) and
thereby alters the pharmacokinetic profiles of co-administered drugs. In such cases,
sponsors should evaluate the potential for a therapeutic protein to affect the other drug(s).

• A concomitantly administered medication that impacts the distribution of the therapeutic
protein to the site of target14,15 or the target-mediated disposition of the therapeutic

12 Coutant DE and SD Hall, 2018, Disease-Drug Interactions in Inflammatory States Via Effects on CYP-Mediated
Drug Clearance, J Clin Pharmacol, 58:849-863.

13 Sathe AG, AA Othman, MF Mohamed, 2021, Therapeutic Protein Drug Interaction Potential in Subjects With
Psoriasis: An Assessment Based on Population Pharmacokinetic Analyses of Sensitive Cytochrome P450 Probe
Substrates, J Clin Pharmacol, 61:307-318.

14 Abuqayyas L and JP Balthasar, 2012, Pharmacokinetic mAb-mAb Interaction: Anti-VEGF mAb Decreases the
Distribution of Anti-CEA mAb into Colorectal Tumor Xenografts, AAPS J, 14:445–455.

15 Pastuskovas CV, EE Mundo, SP Williams et al, 2012, Effects of Anti-VEGF on Pharmacokinetics,
Biodistribution, and Tumor Penetration of Trastuzumab in a Preclinical Breast Cancer Model, Mol Cancer Ther,
11:752-762.

## Page 8

Contains Nonbinding Recommendations

 5
protein.16 In such cases, depending on the role of the therapeutic protein in the DDI,
sponsors should evaluate the DDI potential of the therapeutic protein to affect the other
drug(s) or be affected by the other drug(s).

• A concomitantly administered therapeutic protein that affects another therapeutic
protein’s interaction with the FcRn (e.g., saturating, blocking, or interfering with the
interaction between therapeutic proteins containing an Fc region of human IgG and
FcRn) and decreases the exposure of the therapeutic protein.17,18 In such cases, depending
on the role of the investigational therapeutic protein in the DDI, sponsors should evaluate
the DDI potential of the therapeutic protein to affect the other drug(s) or be affected by
the other drug(s).

• A concomitantly administered immunosuppressor with a therapeutic protein whose
pharmacokinetics are affected by immunogenicity (e.g., methotrexate on the clearance of
adalimumab).19,20  In such cases, the potential of the other drug to affect the therapeutic
protein should be evaluated. This type of DDI evaluation can be difficult to prospectively
design, and as such, a descriptive analysis can often be considered adequate.

III. TYPES OF DDI ASSESSMENTS AND STUDY DESIGN CONSIDERATIONS

Using a systematic, science-driven approach to evaluate the DDI potential of therapeutic proteins
is highly recommended and can involve a combination of the assessment types listed below.
Sponsors should consider the DDI risk of their therapeutic protein early in development and
summarize their DDI evaluation program at milestone meetings with the FDA. Potential
discussion topics at these meetings include the need for and planning, timing, and study design
of DDI evaluations for the investigational therapeutic protein.

A. In Vitro and Animal Studies

In vitro or animal data have not been predictive of the potential for clinical DDIs with
therapeutic proteins. However, such data could provide a mechanistic understanding of the DDI
potential of a therapeutic protein. Sponsors are encouraged to discuss their specific DDI study
plans with the FDA.

16 Lavezzi SM, JD Jong, M Neyens et al, 2019, Systemic Exposure of Rituximab Increased by Ibrutinib:
Pharmacokinetic Results and Modeling Based on the HELIOS Trial, Pharm Res, 36:93.

17 Hansen RJ and JP Balthasar, 2002, Intravenous Immunoglobulin Mediates an Increase in Anti-Platelet Antibody
Clearance via the FcRn Receptor, Thromb Haemost, 88:898–899.

18 USPI of VYVGART®, Sections 7.1 and 12.3.

19 Pouw MF, CL Krieckaet, MT Nurmohamed, DV Kleij, L Aarden, T Rispens, and G Wolbink, 2015, Key Findings
towards Optimising Adalimumab Treatment: the Concentration-effect Curve, Ann Rheum Dis, 74:513–518.

20 USPI of Humira®, Section 12.3.

## Page 9

Contains Nonbinding Recommendations

 6

B. Dedicated Clinical Studies

Clinical studies designed to evaluate the potential for DDIs with a therapeutic protein should
consider the mechanism for the DDI and safety when selecting the relevant study population and
the interacting drugs.

The study design (parallel or crossover) should be informed by the mechanism for the DDI, the
pharmacokinetic (PK) characteristics of the drugs (e.g., the drug’s half-life), and the
immunogenicity risk of the therapeutic protein, for example:

• When the effect of other drug(s) on  the therapeutic protein is evaluated, a parallel design
might be appropriate when the therapeutic protein has a long half-life.

• When evaluating the effect of the therapeutic protein on the other drug(s) (e.g., the effect
of proinflammatory cytokines or proinflammatory cytokine modulators on CYP
substrates), a single-sequence, crossover design can be used (i.e., substrate alone
followed by the substrate plus the therapeutic protein).

-  The sponsor should determine the time course for cytokine modulation by the
therapeutic protein in the specific disease state to guide the timing and duration of
administration of the substrate and therapeutic protein in the study.

-  A cocktail approach (i.e., simultaneous administration of substrates of multiple CYP
enzymes) is an efficient means of evaluating the DDI potential for therapeutic
proteins where multiple CYPs could be impacted (e.g., proinflammatory cytokines
and proinflammatory cytokine modulators).
21

C. Population PK Modeling (Nested DDI Studies)

Population PK analyses can be informative in evaluating the DDI potential of therapeutic
proteins.22,23 A population PK analysis for prospective DDI evaluation should have carefully
designed study procedures and protocols for the collection of PK samples, as well as clear
documentation of the timing of administrations and the types of concomitant medications for
which DDI is being assessed. In general, this approach is used to evaluate the effect of other
agents on the investigational therapeutic protein, as PK data are usually collected for the

21 Jing X, P Ji, SJ Schrieber, EP Fletcher, C Sahajwalla, 2020, Update on Therapeutic Protein-Drug Interaction:
Information in Labeling, Clin Pharmacokinet, 59:25-36.

22 Chow AT, JC Earp, M Gupta, W Hanley, C Hu, DD Wang, S Zajic, and M Zhu, 2014, Population P K TPDI
Working Group: Utility of Population Pharmacokinetic Modeling in the Assessment of Therapeutic Protein-Drug
Interactions, J Clin Pharmacol, 54:593-601.

23 Kenny JR, MM Liu, AT Chow, JC Earp, R Evers, JG Slatter, DD Wang, L Zhang, and HH Zhou, 2013,
Therapeutic Protein Drug–Drug Interactions: Navigating the Knowledge Gaps - Highlights from the 2012 AAPS
NBC Roundtable and IQ Consortium/FDA Workshop, AAPS J, 15:933-940.

## Page 10

Contains Nonbinding Recommendations

 7
investigational agent only. However, a sponsor can prospectively plan and collect the necessary
data for a substrate of interest to support the evaluation of the effect of the investigational
therapeutic protein on the substrate of interest. For a discussion on nested DDI studies, refer to
the FDA guidances entitled Clinical Drug Interaction Studies —  Cytochrome P450 Enzyme- and
Transporter-Mediated Drug Interactions (January 2020) and Population Pharmacokinetics
(February 2022).

D. Other Modeling Approaches

The application of physiologically based PK (PBPK) modeling in the evaluation of the DDI
potential of a therapeutic protein is an emerging area. PBPK modeling has a potential role in
understanding the underlying mechanism of a DDI. For more information, see the FDA guidance
entitled Physiologically Based Pharmacokinetic Analyses —  Format and Content (September
2018).

Other modeling approaches could be considered, and sponsors are encouraged to discuss the
proposed approach with the FDA.

IV. LABELING RECOMMENDATIONS

Prescribing Information must include a summary of essential DDI information needed for the
safe and effective use of the drug by the healthcare provider.
24 For specific requirements and
recommendations regarding how to incorporate DDI information in labeling, refer to 21 CFR
201.57 and the following FDA guidances:25

• Labeling for Human Prescription Drug and Biological Products – Implementing the
PLR Content and Format Requirements (February 2013)

• Warnings and Precautions, Contraindications, and Boxed Warning Sections of Labeling
for Human Prescription Drug and Biological Products —  Content and Format (October
2011)

• Clinical Pharmacology Section of Labeling for Human Prescription Drug and
Biological Products —  Content and Format (December 2016)

• Patient Counseling Information Section of Labeling for Human Prescription Drug and
Biological Products — Content and Format (December 2014)

24 21 CFR 201.56(a)(1).

25 See also the FDA draft guidance entitled Dosage and Administration Section of Labeling for Human Prescription
Drug and Biological Products —  Content and Format (January 2023). When final, this guidance will represent the
Agency’s current thinking on this topic.

## Page 11

Contains Nonbinding Recommendations

 8

V. APPENDIX. DECISION TREE

Include
labeling
language indicating
potential for CYP-
mediated drug
Interaction#
Known
or suspected
mechanisms
for DDI (see
Section IIB)
Label
appropriately#
Provide scientific
justification for no
interaction potential
(see Section IIA)
No
further
action
Pro-inflammatory
cytokine
modulator TPs
Pro-inflammatory
cytokine TPs
Conduct DDI
evaluation*
(see Section III)
TPs not included
in the above
categories
Adequate
justification
No
further
action
Yes Yes
No
No
No
Yes

CYP, cytochrome P450; DDI, drug-drug interaction; TP, therapeutic protein.
*The Agency recommends that DDI evaluation proposals be discussed with the appropriate review division before
initiating a study.
#Refer to Section IV.
