# 5.FDA_Clinical Drug Interaction Studies With Combined Oral Contraceptives_202306

## Page 1

Clinical Drug
Interaction Studies
With Combined Oral
Contraceptives
Guidance for Industry

U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
Food and Drug Administration
Center for Drug Evaluation and Research

June 2023
Clinical Pharmacology

## Page 2

Clinical Drug
Interaction Studies
With Combined Oral
Contraceptives
Guidance for Industry

Additional copies are available from:
Office of Communications,
 Division of Drug Information
Center for Drug Evaluation and Research
Food and Drug Administration
10001 New Hampshire Ave., Hillandale Bldg., 4th Floor
Silver Spring, MD 20993-0002
Phone: 855-543-3784 or 301-796-3400; Fax: 301-431-6353
Email: druginfo@fda.hhs.gov
https://www.fda.gov/drugs/guidance-compliance-regulatory-information/guidances-drugs

U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
Food and Drug Administration
Center for Drug Evaluation and Research (CDER)

 June 2023
Clinical Pharmacology

## Page 3

Contains Nonbinding Recommendations

TABLE OF CONTENTS

I.
 INTRODUCTION............................................................................................................. 1
II. BACKGROUND ............................................................................................................... 2
III. WHEN COC DDI STUDIES SHOULD BE CONDUCTED......................................... 2
IV. DESIGN AND CONDUCT OF CLINICAL COC DDI STUDIES .............................. 4
V. INTERPRETING THE RESULTS OF CLINICAL COC DDI STUDIES ................. 5
VI. EXTRAPOLATING THE RESULTS OF CLINICAL COC DDI STUDIES ............. 5
VII. LABELING RECOMMENDATIONS............................................................................ 6
VIII. ABBREVIATIONS ........................................................................................................... 8
IX. DEFINITIONS .................................................................................................................. 9
X. APPENDIX ...................................................................................................................... 10

## Page 4

Contains Nonbinding Recommendations

 1
Clinical Drug Interaction Studies With Combined Oral
Contraceptives
Guidance for Industry1

This guidance represents the current thinking of the Food and Drug Administration (FDA or Agency) on
this topic.  It does not establish any rights for any person and is not binding on FDA or the public.  You
can use an alternative approach if it satisfies the requirements of the applicable statutes and regulations.
To discuss an alternative approach, contact the FDA staff responsible for this guidance as listed on the
title page.

I. INTRODUCTION

This guidance is intended to help sponsors of investigational new drug applications (INDs) and
new drug applications (NDAs) evaluate the drug-drug interaction (DDI) effects of their
investigational drugs on combined oral contraceptives (COCs), design DDI studies, and
determine how to communicate DDI study results and risk mitigation strategies in labeling to
address potential risks associated with increased or decreased exposure of COCs.

Reference is made to the FDA guidances entitled Clinical Drug Interaction Studies –
Cytochrome P450 Enzyme- and Transporter-Mediated Drug Interactions (January 2020)
2 for
general principles in assessing the clinical DDI potential and In Vitro Drug Interaction Studies —
Cytochrome P450 Enzyme- and Transporter-Mediated Drug Interactions (January 2020) for in
vitro experimental approaches to evaluate the interaction potential for investigational drugs that
involve metabolizing enzymes and/or transporters.  This guidance focuses solely on specific
recommendations relevant to metabolism-based drug interactions with COCs.  Other
mechanisms that can cause an interaction (e.g., absorption-based) are not addressed in this
guidance but should be considered by sponsors and investigators.  In addition, this guidance does
not discuss DDIs with progestin-only pills (POPs) and contraceptives administered via non-oral
routes (e.g., transdermal systems).  However, a DDI study with a COC could inform the impact
on other types of contraceptives containing the same progestin.

In general, FDA’s guidance documents do not establish legally enforceable responsibilities.
Instead, guidances describe the Agency’s current thinking on a topic and should be viewed only
as recommendations, unless specific regulatory or statutory requirements are cited.  The use of
the word should in Agency guidances means that something is suggested or recommended, but
not required.

1 This guidance has been prepared by the Office of Clinical Pharmacology, Office of Translational Sciences, in the
Center for Drug Evaluation and Research at the Food and Drug Administration.

2 We update guidances periodically.  For the most recent version of a guidance, check the FDA guidance web page
at https://www.fda.gov/regulatory-information/search-fda-guidance-documents.

## Page 5

Contains Nonbinding Recommendations

 2

II. BACKGROUND

COCs usually contain two synthetic steroid hormones, a progestin and an estrogen.  COCs are
highly effective in preventing pregnancy when used correctly.  However, drug interactions with
concomitant therapies can adversely impact the efficacy and safety of COCs by affecting
enzymes involved in the metabolism of progestins and estrogens.  For example, decreased
progestin concentrations can lead to unintended pregnancy (loss of efficacy).  In addition,
decreased estrogen concentrations could cause breakthrough bleeding and may also adversely
affect the efficacy of COCs.  Increased estrogen or progestin concentrations can increase the risk
of venous thromboembolisms (VTEs), a rare but serious adverse event.

Because COCs are widely used in females of reproductive potential, and many investigational
drugs are co-prescribed with COCs after approval, the DDI potential between an investigational
drug and COCs should be evaluated during drug development and communicated in the labeling.

III. SITUATIONS WHERE COC DDI STUDIES SHOULD BE CONDUCTED

Cytochrome P450 (CYP) 3A is responsible for the metabolism of most commonly used
progestins, although the relative contribution of CYP3A to the clearance of different progestins
varies.3  Other metabolic enzymes, including CYP2C19, and certain isoforms of uridine 5'-
diphospho-glucuronosyltransferases (UGTs) and sulfotransferases (SULTs), are also involved in
the metabolism of certain progestins.4  These enzymes share gene expression regulation
pathways (e.g., pregnane X receptor, PXR) with CYP3A, although the induction of UGTs and
SULTs is less well understood compared to CYPs.  In general, CYP3A is more sensitive to
induction than other enzymes involved in the metabolism of progestins such as CYP2C19,
UGTs, and SULTs.  Therefore, an investigational drug’s induction effect on CYP3A can inform
its potential to affect the pharmacokinetics of progestins in humans.

The metabolism of ethinyl estradiol (EE), the most commonly used estrogen in COCs, involves
multiple enzymes (i.e., CYP3A, CYP2C9, UGT1A1, and SULT1E1).4  Available information
from clinical DDI studies suggests that moderate or strong inhibition of CYP3A combined with
inhibition of other metabolic pathways of EE can significantly increase EE exposure levels
higher than 50 mcg EE, the level at which there is an increased risk of serious adverse reactions,
including VTEs.5

3 Li L, X Yang, D Tran, SK Seo, and Y Lu. 2023, Combined Oral Contraceptives as Victims of Drug Interactions,
Drug Metab Dispos, doi: 10.1124/dmd.122.000854 (online ahead of print).

4 Zhang N, J Shon, M Kim, C Yu, L Zhang, S Huang, L Lee, D Tran, and L Li, 2018, Role of CYP3A4 in Oral
Contraceptives Clearance, Clin Trans Sci, 11:251-260.

5 Gerstman BB, JM Piper, DK Tomita, WJ Ferguson, BV Stadel, and FE Lundin, 1991, Oral Contraceptive Estrogen
Dose and the Risk of Deep Venous Thromboembolic Disease, Am J Epidemiol, 133(1):32-37.

## Page 6

Contains Nonbinding Recommendations

 3
When an investigational drug for chronic use is expected to be co-administered with a COC in
females of reproductive potential, and in vitro studies suggest that it is a CYP3A inducer or
inhibitor, the sponsor can consider the following (see sections III.A-III.B) to determine whether a
clinical DDI study should be conducted.  Also, for an investigational drug that is given for short-
term use, sponsors should discuss whether to conduct a DDI study with a COC with the
appropriate FDA review division.

A. CYP3A Inducers

When in vitro data suggest that the investigational drug has the potential to induce CYP3A in
humans, the sponsor can address the DDI potential with COCs via one of the pathways below
(see also Figure 1 in the Appendix):

• If the investigational drug does not significantly decrease the area under the plasma
concentration-time curve (AUC) of a sensitive CYP3A substrate (i.e., reducing the AUC
of a sensitive CYP3A substrate by < 20 percent), then:

o A COC DDI study might not be warranted when the investigational drug (and/or its
metabolite when relevant) is not a CYP3A inhibitor in vitro or is not expected to
inhibit CYP3A in humans.
6  In this scenario, the lack of effect of the drug on a
CYP3A substrate from the clinical DDI study indicates that the drug does not induce
CYP3A in humans.  Hence, the drug is not expected to markedly decrease the
systemic exposures of progestins/estrogens.

o Further evaluation of the DDI potential with COCs could be recommended if the drug
(and/or its metabolite when relevant) inhibits CYP3A in vitro and is expected to
inhibit CYP3A in humans.  There could be situations where a drug is both a potent
inducer and an inhibitor of CYP3A, so that the net effect on a sensitive CYP3A
substrate is minimal or shown as inhibition.  However, other enzymes (e.g., UGT)
involved in the metabolism of COCs can also be induced via a shared gene regulation
pathway with CYP3A.  Therefore, if the drug does not inhibit these other enzymes, it
could still decrease the AUC of COCs.  Sponsors are encouraged to consult with the
appropriate FDA review division on whether to conduct a DDI study with a COC in
such cases.

• If the investigational drug is a weak CYP3A inducer (i.e., reducing the AUC of a
sensitive CYP3A substrate by ≥ 20 to < 50 percent), then the sponsor should conduct a
clinical DDI study with a COC to evaluate the effect of the investigational drug on the
COC.  If the sponsor does not intend to conduct a COC DDI study, adequate justification
should be provided.  Some factors that should be taken into consideration include:  (1) the
projected magnitude of the interaction based on the study with a sensitive CYP3A
substrate and other scientific evidence, such as a lack of concurrent CYP3A inhibition;
and (2) whether the investigational drug shows nonclinical reproductive and

6 Refer to the FDA guidance entitled In Vitro Drug Interaction Studies —  Cytochrome P450 Enzyme- and
Transporter-Mediated Drug Interactions (January 2020).

## Page 7

Contains Nonbinding Recommendations

 4
developmental toxicity findings of concern to humans.7  Sponsors are encouraged to
consult with the appropriate FDA review division in such cases.

• If the investigational drug is a moderate CYP3A inducer (i.e., reduces the AUC of a
sensitive CYP3A substrate by ≥ 50 to < 80 percent), sponsors should consider conducting
a dedicated DDI study with a COC to evaluate the magnitude of exposure change of the
COC.  In the absence of a dedicated DDI study, labeling should recommend avoiding
concomitant use with COCs.  If concomitant use cannot be avoided, an alternative
contraceptive that is not affected by enzyme inducers (e.g., intrauterine system) or
additional nonhormonal contraception (e.g., condoms) should be recommended, since the
drug has the potential to reduce the exposure, and possibly the efficacy, of COCs.

• If an investigational drug is a strong CYP3A inducer (i.e., reduces the AUC of a sensitive
CYP3A substrate by ≥ 80 percent), then significant reduction in exposures of COCs are
likely to occur.  Therefore, the labeling should recommend avoiding concomitant use
with COCs.  Furthermore, if the use of the CYP3A inducer is unavoidable, an alternative
contraceptive method (e.g., intrauterine system) or additional nonhormonal contraception
(e.g., condoms) should be recommended.

When a drug is shown or anticipated to significantly reduce the systemic exposures of
progestins/estrogens, further evaluations could be considered to characterize the time for the
induction effect to disappear.  These additional evaluations could be helpful in identifying the
duration that an alternative contraceptive method or additional nonhormonal contraception
should be used after cessation of the investigational drug.

B. CYP3A Inhibitors

COCs containing 50 mcg of EE or more have been reported to be associated with clinically
meaningful increases in the risk of serious adverse reactions, such as VTEs, compared to
products containing less than 50 mcg of EE.
5  Therefore, an approximately 40 percent increase in
EE concentration for COCs containing 35 mcg EE resulting in exposures similar to COCs
containing 50 mcg EE could be clinically meaningful.  The sponsor should conduct a clinical
COC DDI study (see Figure 2 in the Appendix) to quantify the magnitude of the DDI if:  (1)
prior clinical DDI studies suggest that the investigational drug is a moderate or strong CYP3A
inhibitor (i.e., it increases the AUC of a sensitive CYP3A substrate by 2-fold or more); and (2) in
vitro or in vivo data suggest that the investigational drug also inhibits one or more other enzymes
involved in the metabolism of EE (e.g., CYP2C9, UGT1A1, and SULT1E1).

7  For more information, see the FDA guidance entitled S5(R3) Detection of Reproductive and
Developmental Toxicity for Human Pharmaceuticals (May 2021 ICH Revision 3).

## Page 8

Contains Nonbinding Recommendations

 5
Inhibition of SULT1E1 could lead to a significant increase in EE exposures.8,9  Therefore, for
investigational drugs that inhibit SULT1E1, a clinical DDI study with COCs should be
considered or appropriate mitigation strategies should be proposed in labeling.  Due to very
limited in vitro and clinical DDI studies conducted for SULTs so far, a cut-off value for in vitro-
to-in vivo extrapolation using basic equations similar to those recommended for CYP enzymes
has not yet been established.

C. Teratogenic Drugs for Use in Females of Reproductive Potential

For investigational drugs that have teratogenic potential,10,11 even if the results of in vitro or
clinical DDI studies using a sensitive CYP3A substrate probe suggest weak or no induction
potential on CYP3A, a COC DDI study should still be conducted.  For teratogenic drugs that are
moderate or strong inducers of CYP3A, the approach of evaluating for DDIs with a COC is the
same as that described in Figure 1 and section III.A.  For drugs that do not have teratogenic
potential but are intended to be used with teratogenic drugs as a combination therapy, the
sponsor should address the interaction potential with COCs as for teratogenic drugs.  Sponsors
are encouraged to consult with the appropriate FDA review division.

IV. DESIGN AND CONDUCT OF CLINICAL COC DDI STUDIES

A. Study Population

Premenopausal and postmenopausal females can be included in the DDI study; however,
including premenopausal females allows for the assessment of pharmacodynamic (PD) endpoints
that cannot be studied in postmenopausal subjects.

The number of subjects included in a COC DDI study should be sufficient to provide a reliable
estimate of the magnitude and variability of pharmacokinetic (PK) parameters.

B. Choice of COC

8 Schwartz J, T Hunt, WB Smith, P Wong, P Larson, T Crumley, A Mehta, K Gottesdiener, N Agrawal, 2009, The
Effect of Etoricoxib on the Pharmacokinetics of Oral Contraceptives in Healthy Participants, J Clin Pharmacol,
49(7):807-15.

9 Helmer E, N Karimian, K Van Assche, I Seghers, S Le Tallec, G Cherala, G Scott, FS Namour, 2022, Ziritaxestat
Drug-Drug Interaction with Oral Contraceptives: Role of SULT1E1 Inhibition, Clin Pharmacol Ther, Jun 17. doi:
10.1002/cpt.2689.

10 Ahn MR, L Li, J Shon, ED Bashaw, and M-J Kim, 2016, Teratogenic Drugs and Their Drug Interactions with
Hormonal Contraceptives, Clin Pharmacol Ther, 100:217-219.

11 Akbar M, E Berry-Bibee, DL Blithe, RS Day, A Edelman, J Höchel, J Roxanne, M Kim, L Li, VS Purohit, JA
Turpin, PE Scott, DG Strauss, H Sun, NK Tepper, L Zhang, and C Yu, 2018, FDA Public Meeting Report on Drug
Interactions With Hormonal Contraceptives: Public Health and Drug Development Implications, J Clin Pharmacol,
58:1655-1665.

## Page 9

Contains Nonbinding Recommendations

 6
Sponsors should use COCs that contain the most commonly used progestins in the United States,
such as norethindrone (NET), norgestimate (NGM), levonorgestrel (LNG), or drospirenone
(DRSP), combined with EE, so that the study results can directly inform the most likely clinical
use.  Since DRSP is more sensitive to CYP3A modulation,12 a negative DDI result can be
extrapolated to COCs containing progestins that are less sensitive to CYP3A induction (e.g.,
NET and LNG).  Alternatively, studying the COCs containing less sensitive progestin can
maximize the chances of confirming the lack of impact of a drug as an inducer on the specific
progestin but would limit the ability to extrapolate the study results to other progestins (see
section VI).

C. Dose

The investigational drug should be given at the highest proposed dose for labeling and should be
dosed for a sufficient duration to ensure maximal modulation effect of the drug on metabolizing
pathways of COCs.

The COC can be dosed as either a single dose or as multiple doses for the PK assessment.  For
PD assessments, multiple doses of a COC are recommended.

D. Study Design

Fixed sequence or randomized crossover studies are preferred.  If these designs are not feasible,
a parallel study design is acceptable.

E. PK Sampling

Intensive PK sampling should be conducted for progestins and estrogens of the COC on PK
assessment days to adequately characterize the maximum concentration (C
max) and AUC.  In
addition, PK sampling of the investigational drug is useful to ensure that adequate systemic
exposures are achieved.

F. PD Assessments

Currently, the dose/exposure-response relationships of progestin and estrogen for contraceptive
efficacy are not fully established.  An approach for assessing PD parameters (e.g., estradiol,
follicle stimulating hormone, luteinizing hormone, progesterone, and Hoogland score13) in
addition to PK parameters can be considered, as it could provide supportive information when
the geometric mean ratios of the systemic exposure parameters fall outside of the no-effect
boundaries (see sections V and IX).

12 Wiesinger H, S Klein, A Rottmann, B Nowotny, K Riecke, I Gashaw, M Brudny-Klöppel, R Fricke, J Höchel, and
C Friedrich, 2020, The Effects of Weak and Strong CYP3A Induction by Rifampicin on the Pharmacokinetics of
Five Progestins and Ethinylestradiol Compared to Midazolam, Clin Pharmacol Ther, 108(4):798-807.

13 Hoogland HJ and SO Skouby, 1993, Ultrasound Evaluation of Ovarian Activity Under Oral Contraceptives,
Contraception, 47(6):583-90.

## Page 10

Contains Nonbinding Recommendations

 7
Sponsors are encouraged to seek feedback from the appropriate FDA review division when they
plan to conduct PK assessments using alternative study designs, including PD assessments.

V. INTERPRETING THE RESULTS OF CLINICAL COC DDI STUDIES

The primary systemic exposure parameters should be reported, for example, the area under the
plasma concentration-time curve (AUC) integrated across the dosing interval (AUC
0-TAU) for
multiple-dose studies, the AUC from time of administration extrapolated to infinity (AUC0-inf)
for single-dose studies, and Cmax.

If the 90 percent confidence intervals (CIs) for the geometric mean ratio of the systemic
exposure parameters fall entirely within the no-effect boundaries of 80 to 125 percent for the
COC, no significant DDI is considered to be present.  If the 90 percent CIs are outside of the 80
to 125 percent boundaries, the totality of evidence (e.g., safety and efficacy of the COC) should
be considered when determining the clinical impact of the DDI on the COC.  For certain drugs
such as teratogenic drugs, the clinical context and individual PK changes should be considered in
addition to the CIs.

VI. EXTRAPOLATING THE RESULTS OF CLINICAL COC DDI STUDIES

Although progestins including NET, LNG, NGM, or DRSP usually have the same direction of
exposure change (increase versus decrease) when taken with the same investigational drug (i.e., a
CYP3A inhibitor or inducer), quantitative extrapolation of DDI results from one progestin in a
COC to another is challenging due to the different extent of CYP3A-mediated metabolism for
each of these progestins.

DRSP is a more sensitive CYP3A substrate compared to certain approved progestins such as
NET and LNG.12  Therefore, the magnitude of exposure changes in DRSP due to CYP3A
induction is expected to be larger than that for NET and LNG.  For an investigational drug that is
a CYP3A inducer, if a clinical DDI study with a DRSP-containing COC shows no interaction,
the investigational drug is less likely to affect the PK of progestins in NET- and LNG-containing
COCs.

VII. LABELING RECOMMENDATIONS

In general, the magnitude of the interaction and clinical consequences will guide labeling
recommendations.  For example:
14

14 For more examples, see a related FDA draft guidance entitled Labeling for Combined Hormonal Contraceptives
(December 2017).  When final, this guidance will represent the Agency’s current thinking on this topic.

## Page 11

Contains Nonbinding Recommendations

 8
• If the increase in EE exposures leads to exposure levels exceeding those observed at an
EE dose of 50 mcg, the drug’s labeling should recommend avoiding concomitant use
with COCs containing EE or to avoid use with a COC when EE exceeds a specific dose.

• If the investigational drug is an enzyme inducer that will decrease progestin or estrogen
exposure to an extent that can lead to reduced effectiveness of the COC, the drug’s
labeling should recommend avoiding concomitant use with COCs.  If use of the enzyme
inducer is unavoidable, an alternative contraceptive that is not affected by enzyme
inducers (e.g., an intrauterine system) or additional nonhormonal contraception (e.g.,
condoms) should be recommended in the labeling.

COCs DDI information in the DRUG INTERACTIONS section of the drug’s labeling:

• Must describe clinically significant DDIs
15 and the mechanism of the clinically
significant DDIs16 (e.g., PK metabolism-based, PD interaction) if known, and should
cross-reference to the CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY17 section of labeling for details of
the DDI study results

• Should include the clinical effects of clinically significant DDIs

• Must include specific practical instructions for preventing or managing clinically
significant DDIs15 and should cross reference to the DOSAGE AND
ADMINISTRATION section of labeling for detailed dosage modification information, if
applicable

When the COC DDI study results show no clinically significant DDI between a drug and the
tested COC, the Pharmacokinetics subsection of CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY section of the
drug’s labeling should include the following statement or similar statement:  No clinically
significant differences in [drug substance] pharmacokinetics were observed when Drug-X was
used concomitantly with Drug-Y.
17

When drug interaction information appears in multiple sections of labeling, applicants should
cross-reference DDI information in accordance with the recommendations in the FDA guidance
entitled Labeling for Human Prescription Drug and Biological Products – Implementing the
PLR Content and Format Requirements (February 2013).

15 21 CFR 201.57(c)(8)(i).

16 21 CFR 201.57(c)(8)(i).

17 For more information, see the FDA guidance entitled Clinical Pharmacology Section of Labeling for Human
Prescription Drug and Biological Products — Content and Format (December 2016).

## Page 12

Contains Nonbinding Recommendations

 9
VIII. ABBREVIATIONS

AUC0-INF  Area under the plasma concentration-time curve (AUC) from time of
administration extrapolated to infinity

AUC
0-TAU  Area under the plasma concentration-time curve integrated across the
dosing interval

COC Combined oral contraceptive

CIs  Confidence intervals

CYP Cytochrome P450

DDI Drug-drug interaction

DRSP Drospirenone

EE  Ethinyl estradiol

FDA Food and Drug Administration

IND       Investigational new drug application

LNG Levonorgestrel

NDA New drug application

NET Norethindrone

NGM Norgestimate

PD  Pharmacodynamic

PK  Pharmacokinetic

PLR Physician labeling rule

POP Progestin-only pill

SULTs Sulfotransferases

UGTs Uridine 5'-diphospho-glucuronosyltransferases

VTE Venous thromboembolism

## Page 13

Contains Nonbinding Recommendations

 10
IX. DEFINITIONS

Inducer An inducer is a drug that decreases the AUC of substrates of a given
metabolic pathway.

Inhibitor An inhibitor is a drug that increases the AUC of substrates of a given
metabolic pathway.

No-effect boundaries No-effect boundaries represent the interval within which a change in a
systemic exposure measure is considered not significant enough to warrant
clinical action (e.g., dose or schedule adjustment, or additional therapeutic
monitoring).

## Page 14

Contains Nonbinding Recommendations

 11
X. APPENDIX

Figures 1 and 2 show decision trees for determining when clinical COC DDI studies should be
conducted. It should be noted that these decision trees are not applicable for investigational drugs
that have teratogenic potential or will be used in combination with teratogenic drugs (see section
III.C).

Figure 1: COC DDI Study Decision Tree Based on CYP Induction Potential

1 A COC DDI study might not be recommended when the drug (and/or its metabolite when relevant) is not a
CYP3A inhibitor in vitro or is not expected to inhibit CYP3A in humans; further evaluation of the DDI potential
with COCs could be recommended if the drug (and/or its metabolite when relevant) inhibits CYP3A in vitro and is
expected to inhibit CYP3A in humans, given the potential for the inhibitory effect to counteract the induction effect.

2 For strong CYP3A inducers, labeling should recommend avoiding the use of this drug in patients taking COCs.  If
concomitant use cannot be avoided, use an alternative contraceptive that is not affected by enzyme inducers (e.g.,
intrauterine system) or additional nonhormonal contraception (e.g., condoms).

3 For moderate CYP3A inducers, sponsors can consider conducting a dedicated study with a COC.  If the results
suggest no significant decrease in exposure of the COC, concomitant use with the COC studied could be allowed.  In
the absence of a dedicated study, labeling should recommend avoiding the use of this drug in patients taking COCs.
If concomitant use cannot be avoided, use an alternative contraceptive that is not affected by enzyme inducers (e.g.,
intrauterine system) or additional nonhormonal contraception (e.g., condoms).

4 For weak CYP3A inducers, if sponsors do not intend to conduct a COC DDI study, adequate justification should
be provided.  Some factors that should be taken into consideration include:  (1) the projected magnitude of the
interaction based on the study with a sensitive CYP3A substrate and other scientific evidence such as a lack of
concurrent CYP3A inhibition; and (2) whether the investigational drug shows any nonclinical reproductive and
developmental toxicity.  Sponsors are encouraged to consult the relevant review division in such cases.

## Page 15

Contains Nonbinding Recommendations

 12
Figure 2: COC DDI Study Decision Tree Based on CYP Inhibition Potential

1 Inhibition of SULT1E1 alone can lead to a significant increase in EE exposures.  For drugs that inhibit SULT1E1,
regardless of its inhibitory effect on CYP3A, a clinical DDI study with COCs should be considered or appropriate
mitigation strategies should be proposed in labeling.
