# 6.FDA_Gastric pH-Dependent Drug Interactions (Acid-Reducing Agents)_202603

## Page 1

Evaluation of Gastric pH-
Dependent Drug Interactions
With Acid-Reducing Agents:
Study Design, Data Analysis,
and Clinical Implications

Guidance for Industry

U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
Food and Drug Administration
Center for Drug Evaluation and Research (CDER)

March 2023
Clinical Pharmacology

## Page 2

Evaluation of Gastric pH-
Dependent Drug Interactions
With Acid-Reducing Agents:
Study Design, Data Analysis,
and Clinical Implications
Guidance for Industry

Additional copies are available from:
Office of Communications,
 Division of Drug Information
Center for Drug Evaluation and Research
Food and Drug Administration
10001 New Hampshire Ave., Hillandale Bldg., 4th Floor
Silver Spring, MD 20993-0002
Phone: 855-543-3784 or 301-796-3400; Fax: 301-431-6353
Email: druginfo@fda.hhs.gov
https://www.fda.gov/drugs/guidance-compliance-regulatory-information/guidances-drugs

U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
Food and Drug Administration
Center for Drug Evaluation and Research (CDER)

March 2023
Clinical Pharmacology

## Page 3

Contains Nonbinding Recommendations

i
TABLE OF CONTENTS

I. INTRODUCTION............................................................................................................. 1
II. WHEN CLINICAL DDI STUDIES WITH ARAS SHOULD BE CONDUCTED ..... 2
A. Immediate-Release Products of Weak-Base Drugs................................................................2
B. Immediate-Release Products of Weak-Acid Drugs................................................................5
C. Modified-Release Products ...................................................................................................5
III. DESIGN AND CONDUCT OF CLINICAL DDI STUDIES ........................................ 5
IV. ALTERNATIVE APPROACHES FOR EVALUATING PH-DEPENDENT DDIS .. 7
V. EXTRAPOLATING CLINICAL DDI STUDY RESULTS .......................................... 8
VI. LABELING RECOMMENDATIONS.......................................................................... 10

## Page 4

Contains Nonbinding Recommendations
Draft — Not for Implementation
1

Evaluation of Gastric pH-Dependent Drug Interactions With Acid-
Reducing Agents:  Study Design, Data Analysis, and Clinical
Implications
Guidance for Industry1

This guidance represents the current thinking of the Food and Drug Administration (FDA or Agency) on
this topic.  It does not establish any rights for any person and is not binding on FDA or the public.  You
can use an alternative approach if it satisfies the requirements of the applicable statutes and regulations.
To discuss an alternative approach, contact the FDA office responsible for this guidance as listed on the
title page.

I. INTRODUCTION

Elevation of gastric pH by acid-reducing agents (ARAs) can affect the solubility and dissolution
characteristics of some orally administered drugs.  As a result, concomitant administration of a
drug with an ARA could alter the bioavailability of the drug, potentially resulting in a loss of
efficacy for weak-base drugs or increased adverse events for weak-acid drugs.  ARAs such as
antacids, histamine H
2-receptor antagonists (H2 blockers), and proton pump inhibitors (PPIs) are
widely used, and these drugs are available through prescription and also over the counter.2,3
Consequently, there is a potential risk for clinically significant drug-drug interactions (DDIs)
with concomitant administration of drugs with ARAs.  Therefore, it is important to assess the
susceptibility of an investigational drug to DDIs mediated by gastric-pH changes (referred to as
pH-dependent DDIs) early in drug development, characterize the DDI effect with clinical studies
when needed, and communicate the relevant findings and mitigation options where available in
the drug product labeling.

This guidance describes the FDA’s recommendations regarding:  (1) when clinical DDI studies
with ARAs are needed; (2) the design of such clinical DDI studies; (3) how to interpret these
study results; and (4) communicating these findings in drug product labeling.
4

1 This guidance has been prepared by the Office of Clinical Pharmacology, Office of Translational Sciences, in the
Center for Drug Evaluation and Research at the Food and Drug Administration.

2 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention's (CDC's) National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey, available
at:  https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/hus/hus16.pdf#079 (accessed April 1, 2022).

3 Zhang L, F Wu, SC Lee, H Zhao, and L Zhang, 2014, pH-Dependent Drug-Drug Interactions for Weak Base
Drugs:  Potential Implications for New Drug Development, Clin Pharmacol Ther, 96(2):266-277.

4 For general considerations regarding the evaluation of DDIs during drug development, see the FDA guidance
entitled Clinical Drug Interaction Studies – Cytochrome P450 Enzymes and Transporters-Mediated Drug
Interactions (January 2020).  We update guidances periodically.  For the most recent version of a guidance, check
the FDA guidance web page at https://www.fda.gov/RegulatoryInformation/Guidances/default.htm.

## Page 5

Contains Nonbinding Recommendations
Draft —  Not for Implementation
2

This guidance does not cover other DDI mechanisms for some ARAs such as reduced absorption
due to the formation of chelate complexes (e.g., aluminum or magnesium hydroxides, calcium
carbonate) for weak-acid drugs and decreased renal elimination of certain drugs as a result of the
alkalinization of urine (e.g., sodium bicarbonate).  When appropriate, sponsors should evaluate
the significance of these DDIs during drug development.

In general, FDA’s guidance documents do not establish legally enforceable responsibilities.
Instead, guidances describe the Agency’s current thinking on a topic and should be viewed only
as recommendations, unless specific regulatory or statutory requirements are cited. The use of
the word should in Agency guidances means that something is suggested or recommended, but
not required.

II. WHEN CLINICAL DDI STUDIES WITH ARAs SHOULD BE CONDUCTED

Sponsors should assess the potential of pH-dependent DDIs for a drug during early development
to better inform dosing of the drug with ARAs in subsequent clinical trials, especially for those
indications where a significant proportion of patients are likely to be taking ARAs.  In general, if
a drug is determined to have the potential for a pH-dependent DDI, the sponsor should conduct a
clinical study to characterize the effect of ARAs on the pharmacokinetics of the investigational
drug (see section III) or provide a rationale justifying the lack of a pH-dependent DDI based on
in vitro, in silico, or clinical information.

A. Immediate-Release Products of Weak-Base Drugs

Most drugs that have demonstrated pH-dependent DDIs are weak bases with low intrinsic
aqueous solubility compared to the solubility needed to dissolve the clinical dose (i.e., the
highest therapeutic dose divided by 250 mL).  The potential for an investigational drug to have
an interaction with an ARA can be assessed in a stepwise manner based on the physicochemical
properties of the drug substance and dissolution profiles of the drug product.
5  A framework is
presented below as an example for how to assess clinical DDI risk with ARAs (Figure 1).
Sponsors should consult the appropriate review division if they pursue alternative strategies to
evaluate pH-dependent DDIs.

5 Miao L, F Wu, X Yang, YM Mousa, A Ramamoorthy, SC Lee, K Raines, L Zhang, and P Seo, 2022, Application
of Solubility and Dissolution Profile Comparison for Prediction of Gastric pH-Mediated Drug-Drug Interactions,
AAPS J, 24(35):https://doi.org/10.1208/s12248-022-00684-3.

## Page 6

Contains Nonbinding Recommendations

 3
Figure 1.  A Framework to Assess Clinical DDI Risk with ARAs for Immediate-Release
Products of Weak-Base Drugs

rpm – revolutions per minute

f2 – similarity factor6

a When appropriate, with justification, other dissolution parameters (e.g., apparatus, speed) and biorelevant
media can be selected based on the properties of the drug substance and product.7,8,9,10

6 For more information, see the FDA guidance entitled M9 Biopharmaceutics Classification System-Based
Biowaivers (May 2021).

7 Markopoulos C, CJ Andreas, M Vertzoni, J Dressman, C Reppas, 2015, In Vitro Simulation of Luminal Conditions
for Evaluation of Performance of Oral Drug Products: Choosing the Appropriate Test Media, Eur J Pharm
Biopharm, 93:173-82.

8 Mann J, J Dressman, K Rosenblatt, L Ashworth, U Muenster, K Frank, P Hutchins, J Williams, L Klumpp, K
Wielockx, P Berben, P Augustijns, R Holm, M Hofmann, S Patel, S Beato, K Ojala, I Tomaszewska, J Bruel, J
Bulter, 2017, Validation of Dissolution Testing With Biorelevant Media: An OrBiTo Study, Mol Pharm,
14(12):4192-4201.

9 Dressman JB, M Vertzoni, K Goumas, C Reppas, 2007, Estimating Drug Solubility in the Gastrointestinal Tract,
2007, Adv Drug Deliv Rev, 59(7):591-602.

10 Segregur D, T Flanagan, J Mann, A Moir, EM Karlsson, M Hoch, D Carlile, S Sayah-Jeanne, J Dressman, 2019,
Impact of Acid-Reducing Agents on Gastrointestinal Physiology and Design of Biorelevant Dissolution Test to
Reflect These Changes, J Pharm Sci, 108(11):3461-3477.

## Page 7

Contains Nonbinding Recommendations

 4
b The average AUC or Cmax of the investigational drug is anticipated to decrease by 25 percent or more in the
presence of an ARA.11  The clinical significance of this decrease for an investigational drug should be
determined based on the dose/exposure-efficacy relationship of individual drug.

c Alternative approaches (e.g., population pharmacokinetic or physiologically based pharmacokinetic
modeling, see section IV) can be considered.

The assessments should account for the following additional considerations:

• Solubility:  It is important to characterize the aqueous equilibrium solubility profile of
the drug substance over a physiologically relevant pH range (e.g., 1.0 to 6.8).12  The pH
values to conduct solubility measurements should be chosen, for example, in uniform
increments (approximately one pH unit), such that any inflection in the profile is
appropriately characterized.  Since the pH of the medium for measuring solubility could
be altered by a tested drug and deviate from the initial pH, the pH of the solution should
be measured and reported.  The dose used to calculate the reference solubility (i.e., dose
divided by 250 mL) should be the maximum therapeutic dose intended to be marketed.

• Formulation and dose used in a dissolution test:  Dissolution data can be generated for
an initial formulation during early drug development to help assess the liability of pH-
dependent DDIs for an investigational drug.  In addition, the dissolution test should also
be performed and reported for the formulation intended to be marketed at the maximum
therapeutic dose.

• Drugs intended to be taken only under fed condition:  Gastric pH is elevated upon
food intake.  Thus, for a drug that is intended to be taken under fed conditions, the impact
of gastric-pH changes should be evaluated by comparing solubility and dissolution
profiles at conditions representing the fed state pH conditions to that of pH 6-6.8.  For
example, pH 4-5 approximates the pH condition after a high-fat and high-calorie meal,
and pH 2-3 reflects the pH condition after a light meal.
13,14,15  However, assessing pH-
dependent DDI liability based on in vitro pH-solubility and -dissolution profiles can be

11 Zhang L, F Wu, SC Lee, H Zhao, and L Zhang, 2014, pH-Dependent Drug-Drug Interactions for Weak Base
Drugs:  Potential Implications for New Drug Development, Clin Pharmacol Ther, 96(2):266-277.

12 See the FDA guidance entitled M9 Biopharmaceutics Classification System-Based Biowaivers (May 2021).

13 Surofchy DD, LA Frassetto, and LZ Benet, 2019, Food, Acid Supplementation and Drug Absorption-A
Complicated Gastric Mix:  A Randomized Control Trial, Pharm Res, 36(11):155.

14 Koziolek M, F Schneider, M Grimm, C Mode, A Seekamp, T Roustom, W Siegmund, and W Weitschies,
Intragastric pH and Pressure Profiles After Intake of the High-Caloric, High-Fat Meal as Used for Food-Effect
Studies, 2015, J Control Release, 220(PT A):71-78.

15 Simonian HP, L Vo, S Doma, RS Fisher, and HP Parkman, 2005, Regional Postprandial Differences in pH Within
the Stomach and Gastroesophageal Junction, Dig Dis Sci, 50(12):2276-2285.

## Page 8

Contains Nonbinding Recommendations

 5
challenging because besides elevating pH, food intake stimulates secretion of bile acid
which could increase drug solubility in the gastrointestinal tract.  Under these
circumstances, sponsors should consult with review Divisions.

B. Immediate-Release Products of Weak-Acid Drugs

There is less experience with the evaluation of the impact of pH-dependent DDIs for weak-acid
drugs compared to weak-base drugs.  It is possible that co-administration with a PPI or a H
2
blocker could result in a higher rate or extent (maximum concentration (Cmax) or area under the
concentration time curve (AUC)) of absorption for weak-acid drugs with low solubility at pH 1-2
and increased solubility at elevated pH.  However, based on data from currently approved weak-
acid drugs, the magnitude of pH-dependent DDIs for weak-acid drugs is generally small.
Whether to conduct a clinical study depends on the safety profile or dose/exposure-safety
relationship of a weak-acid drug.

C. Modified-Release Products

Extended-release or delayed-release products with pH-sensitive release mechanisms have the
potential for DDIs with ARAs.  There is very limited experience with clinical pH-dependent DDI
evaluation for these modified-release products.  Sponsors should consult the appropriate review
division for drugs that have a modified-release profile that could have a pH-dependent DDI
liability.

III. DESIGN AND CONDUCT OF CLINICAL DDI STUDIES

• Study population:  Generally, dedicated studies can be conducted in healthy subjects to
characterize the interaction potential with ARAs.  Safety considerations could preclude
the use of healthy subjects for testing certain drugs (e.g., cytotoxic drugs) in which case
these studies should be performed in patients for whom the investigational drug is being
developed.  The number of subjects included in a DDI study should be sufficient to
provide a reliable estimate of the magnitude and variability of the interaction.

• Study design:  Crossover studies (fixed-sequence or randomized) are preferred to reduce
inter-subject variability.  A parallel study design can be considered if a drug has a long
half-life.

• Choice of ARAs:  Selection of ARAs and associated dosing regimens for DDI studies
depends on the purpose (e.g., characterization of a worst-case scenario or identification of
an appropriate mitigation strategy such as staggered administration).  Among the
currently approved ARAs, PPIs result in prolonged effects on gastric pH; therefore, it is
recommended that the study be conducted with or include a PPI.  Effects of other classes

## Page 9

Contains Nonbinding Recommendations

 6
of ARAs can be evaluated as alternatives as needed.  Some considerations are discussed
in detail below.

o PPIs:  Pre-treatment with PPIs for several days (e.g., 4 to 7 days) is needed to reach
the pharmacodynamic steady state of PPIs before administering the investigational
drug.  The effect of PPIs on gastric pH is long lasting, and thus staggered
administration of an investigational drug with a PPI is not expected to mitigate the
DDI risk (see section V for additional considerations).

The effect of PPIs on gastric pH (e.g., mean pH over 24 hours, percentage of the time
when the pH ≥4 in a 24-hour interval) is dependent on the individual PPI and its dose.
It is preferable to select a PPI and a dose that is expected to provide a near maximum
effect on pH elevation.
16,17

o H2 blockers:  In general, administration of single or multiple doses of H2 blockers
ahead of the investigational drug (e.g., 2 hours) can maximize the pH-elevating
effect.18,19  Since H2 blockers result in a relatively shorter duration of pH increase
than PPIs, the pH-dependent DDI risk could be reduced or avoided for a drug with
staggered administration of H2 blockers.  For example, administration of an
investigational drug 2 hours before and 10 to 12 hours after dosing of H2 blockers
could mitigate the risk (see section V for additional considerations).  Such a strategy
should be confirmed with a clinical study.

o Antacids:  Concomitant administration of a single dose of an antacid could be used
due to their direct gastric acid neutralizing effect.

o Additional considerations:  Interacting mechanisms other than gastric-pH changes
should be taken into consideration when choosing an ARA to study.  For example,
omeprazole is a known inhibitor of CYP2C19, and cimetidine inhibits multiple CYP
enzymes and transporters (e.g., CYP2D6, CYP3A4, MATE1 and MATE2/K).  It is
preferable to select an ARA that does not exhibit other interacting mechanisms (see
section I).  Also, an ARA should not be used in a DDI study if its pharmacokinetics
are anticipated to be affected by the investigational drug.

16 Miner P, PO Katz, Y Chen, M Sostek, 2003, Gastric Acid Control With Esomeprazole, Lansoprazole,
Omeprazole, Pantoprazole, and Rabeprazole:  A Five-Way Crossover Study, Am J Gastronenterol, 98(12):2616-20.

17 Kirchheiner J, S Glatt, U Fuhr, U Klotz, I Meineke, T Seufferlein, J Brockmöller, 2009, Relative Potency of
Proton-Pump Inhibitors-Comparison of Effects on Intragastric pH, Eur J Clin Pharmacol, 65(1):9-31.

18 Hedenström H, C Alm, M Kraft, A Grahnén, 1997, Intragastric pH After Oral Administration of Single Doses of
Ranitidine Effervescent Tablets, Omeprazole Capsules and Famotidine Fast-Dissolving Tablets to Fasting Healthy
Volunteers, Aliment Pharmacol Ther, 11(6):1137-41.

19 Miner Jr, PB, LD Allgood, JM Grender, 2007, Comparison of Gastric pH with Omeprazole Magnesium 20.6 mg
(Prilosec OTC) o.m. Famotidine 10 mg (Pepcid AC) b.d. and Famotidine 20 mg b.d. Over 14 Days of Treatment,
Aliment Pharmacol Ther, 25(1):103-9.

## Page 10

Contains Nonbinding Recommendations

 7

• Dose:  To characterize the worst-case scenario, sponsors should select the highest dose of
an ARA in the DDI study that is commonly used in clinical practice (e.g., 40 mg
esomeprazole, 40 mg omeprazole, 40 mg pantoprazole).  The maximum recommended
dose of an investigational drug that is intended for therapeutic use is recommended since
it is more susceptible to pH-dependent DDI effects.  Sponsors should provide a
justification if an alternative dose or dosing regimen is proposed.

• Formulation:  The pH-dependent DDI effect can be formulation dependent.  Thus, a
dedicated study is recommended with the to-be-marketed formulation of an
investigational drug.  It is recognized that such a formulation might not be available
during early drug development.  If a study is performed with an early formulation, the
sponsor should provide a rationale that justifies why the pH-dependent DDI effect can be
extrapolated to the to-be-marketed formulation.

• Dosing frequency of investigational drug:  Single-dose administration of the
investigational drug is acceptable, unless:  (1) there is a change in drug absorption after
multiple doses; or (2) the study has to be conducted in patients, and single-dose
administration is not beneficial to patients who need continuous treatment.

• Food intake:  If an investigational drug is intended to be taken in the fasted state, the
study should be conducted under fasted conditions.  If the investigational drug is intended
to be taken without regard to food, the study should be conducted under fasted conditions
as it is likely to represent the worst-case scenario.  If the investigational drug is intended
to be taken with food, the study should be conducted under fed conditions that are
consistent with late-phase clinical trials.  Administration of a drug with a high-fat meal
could underestimate the pH-dependent DDI effect of ARAs compared to other types of
food, since high-fat meals elevate the baseline gastric pH more than other meals and
stimulate more secretion of bile acids which help solubilize drugs.

• Pharmacokinetic sampling and data collection:  Pharmacokinetic (PK) sampling times
should be sufficient to adequately characterize the AUC
0-INF (or steady-state AUC0-TAU
for multiple-dose studies), the Cmax, the time to reach Cmax (Tmax), and if clinically
relevant, the minimal concentration (Cmin) or partial AUC of an investigational drug
administered alone and when co-administered with an ARA.  Sponsors should also
determine active metabolite concentrations if the metabolites contribute to the
investigational drug’s efficacy or safety.

IV. ALTERNATIVE APPROACHES FOR EVALUATING pH-DEPENDENT DDIs

• Population pharmacokinetic analysis:  DDIs with ARAs can be evaluated within
clinical trials using population pharmacokinetic analyses.  General design considerations

## Page 11

Contains Nonbinding Recommendations

 8
for such analyses can be found in the FDA guidance for industry entitled Population
Pharmacokinetics (February 2022).  Some considerations specific to ARAs are discussed
below.

o Record of the dosing information:  The pH-dependent DDI effect is sensitive to
the time of administration of the investigational drug relative to the ARA (e.g., H2
blockers or antacids) and can also be affected by the dose of ARAs and the intake of
food.  Thus, it is critical to have a prospective plan to ensure that relevant
information such as dose, timing, and duration of administration of the
investigational drug and ARAs as well as food intake and content (e.g., fasted, high-
fat, normal, or light meal) are accurately captured.

o PK sampling:  A pH-dependent DDI is expected to affect drug absorption;
therefore, it is important to have sufficient blood sampling during the absorption
phase of the investigational drug to better capture the potential DDI effect.

o Data analysis:  Since the gastric pH-elevating effects of PPIs, H2 blockers, and
antacids have different durations, it is appropriate to evaluate these ARAs by classes
(e.g., using PPIs, H2 blockers, and antacids as three separate covariates).  If feasible,
it can be useful to compare the systemic exposure of the drug between patients
taking ARAs throughout the trial and patients taking ARAs periodically during the
trial.

• Physiologically based PK (PBPK) simulations:  In conjunction with the assessment
framework outlined in Figure 1, PBPK simulations can sometimes be used to further
assess the potential for pH-dependent DDIs.  PBPK approaches can also be useful to
inform clinical study designs.  The applications of PBPK are still evolving and are
continuously being evaluated by the FDA.  Therefore, sponsors are encouraged to consult
the appropriate review division if they pursue a PBPK simulation approach to evaluate
pH-dependent DDIs.  General considerations for using PBPK approaches in drug
development can be found in the FDA guidance for industry entitled Physiologically
Based Pharmacokinetic Analyses —  Format and Content Guidance for Industry (August
2018).20

V. EXTRAPOLATING CLINICAL DDI STUDY RESULTS

• In general, the effects observed with an investigational drug and one ARA from a
dedicated DDI study can be extrapolated to other ARAs within the same class (i.e., from
one PPI to other PPIs at dose levels that achieve a similar gastric-pH elevating effect).

20 Also see the FDA draft guidance entitled The Use of Physiologically Based Pharmacokinetic Analyses -
Biopharmaceutics Applications for Oral Drug Product Development, Manufacturing Changes, and Controls
(September 2020).  When final, this guidance will represent the Agency’s current thinking on this topic.

## Page 12

Contains Nonbinding Recommendations

 9
• Extrapolation of the findings with an ARA to other in-class ARAs may be confounded
when a dedicated DDI study is conducted with an ARA that has multiple interacting
mechanisms besides a change in gastric pH.

• A framework is presented below for extrapolating results from a dedicated study to
develop labeling recommendations.  The framework depicts the example of a weak-base,
immediate-release investigational drug product evaluated with a PPI (Figure 2).
Sponsors should consult the appropriate review division if they pursue alternative
strategies to evaluate pH-dependent DDIs.

• In general, PPIs represent a worst-case scenario for pH-dependent DDIs due to their long-
lasting effects on gastric pH.  Thus, a negative result from a dedicated study with a PPI
indicates the lack of a pH-dependent DDI for an investigational drug.  Whether PK
results are considered as clinically significant should be determined based on the
exposure-response (e.g., efficacy or safety) relationship of an investigational drug.  Refer
to the FDA guidance for industry entitled Clinical Drug Interaction Studies —
Cytochrome P450 Enzyme- and Transporter-Mediated Drug Interactions (January 2020)
for recommendations regarding interpreting the results of the DDI studies.

• If the study of the investigational drug with a PPI demonstrates a clinically significant
change in the exposure of an investigational drug, the FDA has the following
recommendations regarding mitigation strategies and for conducting additional studies
with the investigational drug to optimize DDI mitigation:

o PPIs:  Avoid the use of the drug with PPIs.  Alternatively, the sponsor can consider
conducting an additional study to evaluate the impact of a lower dose of a PPI.

o H2 blockers:  Avoid the use of the drug with H2 blockers.  Alternatively, the sponsor
can conduct an additional study with the investigational drug to evaluate one or more
staggered dosing schedules to identify a clinically practical dosing regimen to
mitigate the risk of pH-dependent DDIs.

o Antacids:  Drug dosing can be staggered with antacids (e.g., administer the drug 2
hours before or 2 hours after antacid use) because the antacid effect is short-term.21
If needed, the sponsor can conduct a study to evaluate a shorter period of staggered
dosing of the investigational drug with antacids.

Such mitigation strategies should be appropriately communicated in labeling.

21 Lin, MS, P Sun, HY Yu, 1998, Evaluation of Buffering Capacity and Acid Neutralizing-pH Time Profile of
Antacids, J Formos Med Assoc, 97(10):704-10.

## Page 13

Contains Nonbinding Recommendations

 10
Figure 2.  Extrapolating Clinical DDI Study Results and Implications for Immediate-
Release Products of Weak-Base Drugs

VI. LABELING RECOMMENDATIONS

The Prescribing Information must contain a summary of essential scientific information needed
for the safe and effective use of the drug by the healthcare provider.
22  For specific requirements
and recommendations regarding how to incorporate DDI information in labeling, refer to 21 CFR
201.57 and the following FDA guidances:
23,24

o Warnings and Precautions, Contraindications, and Boxed Warning Sections of
Labeling for Prescription Drug and Biological Products — Content and Format
(October 2011)

o Clinical Pharmacology Section of Labeling for Human Prescription Drug and
Biological Products — Content and Format  (December 2016)

22 21 CFR 201.56(a)(1).

23 For additional human prescription drug labeling guidance documents, see the FDA’s Labeling Resources for
Human Prescription Drugs website (available at https://www.fda.gov/drugs/laws-acts-and-rules/fdas-labeling-
resources-human-prescription-drugs).

24 Also see the FDA draft guidance entitled Dosage and Administration Section of Labeling for Human Prescription
Drug and Biological Products — Content and Format  (January 2023). When final, this guidance will represent the
Agency’s current thinking on this topic.

## Page 14

Contains Nonbinding Recommendations

 11

o Patient Counseling Information Section of Labeling for Human Prescription Drug
and Biological Products —  Content and Format (December 2014)
