# 9.EMA_question-answers-ich-m12-guideline-drug-interaction-studies_202406

## Page 1

Official address  Domenico Scarlattilaan 6  ●  1083 HS Amsterdam  ●  The Netherlands
 An agency of the European Union
Address for visits and deliveries  Refer to www.ema.europa.eu/how-to-find-us
Send us a question Go to www.ema.europa.eu/contact  Telephone +31 (0)88 781 6000

© European Medicines Agency, 2024. Reproduction is authorised provided the source is acknowledged.

21 May 2024
EMA/CHMP/ICH/227930/2024
Committee for Medicinal Products for Human Use
ICH M12 Guideline on drug interaction studies
Questions and answers
Transmission to CHMP 21 May 2024
Adoption by CHMP 30 May 2024
Date for coming into effect 30 November 2024

## Page 2

EMA/CHMP/ICH/227930/2024  Page 2/9

Document History
Code History Date
M12 Q&As Adoption by the ICH Assembly under Step 4. 21 May 2024

## Page 3

EMA/CHMP/ICH/227930/2024  Page 3/9

References
ICH M12 Drug Interaction Studies

Table of Contents
Preface .............................................................................................................. 4
1. Introduction .................................................................................................. 4
2. In Vitro evaluation ........................................................................................ 5
3. Clinical evaluation ......................................................................................... 7
4. Reporting and interpreting clinical DDI study results .................................... 7
5. Appendix ....................................................................................................... 8

## Page 4

EMA/CHMP/ICH/227930/2024  Page 4/9

Preface
In response to questions posted to ICH M12 comment period, several Questions and Answers have been developed to provide clarity around
some of the concepts related to evaluation of drug interaction covered in the Guideline.
This Question and Answer (Q&A) document is intended to provide additional clarification and improve harmonization of drug interaction
assessment.
The scope and organization of this Q&A document follow that of ICH M12.
1. Introduction
# Date of
approval Questions Answers
1.1 May, 2024
With regard to the statement that
the results of the mass balance
study are generally recommended
to be available before starting phase
3 study, please provide more
specific recommendations on the
timing of mass balance study for
DDI evaluation.
The mass balance study is useful for confirming the principal elimination
routes of the investigational drug. In this guideline, a general scenario is
shown in which strategies for further DDI assessment are considered based
on the pharmacokinetic profile of the drug obtained in the mass balance
study and in vitro studies. Clinical DDI studies can be conducted based on
information from in vitro studies prior to obtaining additional information
from mass balance study. This guideline does not intend to restrict the
timing of mass balance study for DDI evaluation, and flexibility should be
ensured according to the characteristics of the investigational drug, as
mentioned in the text.

## Page 5

EMA/CHMP/ICH/227930/2024  Page 5/9

2. In Vitro evaluation
# Date of
approval Questions Answers
2.1 May, 2024
It is recommended to pool
microsomes and hepatocytes from
multiple donors for in vitro
metabolism evaluations (substrate
and inhibition evaluations). For what
purposes would data from a single
donor be acceptable?
In general, it is recommended to pool microsomes and hepatocytes from
multiple donors for in vitro metabolism evaluations (substrate and inhibition
evaluations) in order to have a better representation of expression of the
metabolizing enzymes for the entire population.
Single donor batches may be used for mechanistic studies (e.g., to evaluate
the impact of polymorphisms on the in vitro metabolism). Activities of
metabolic enzymes of this single batch of hepatocytes or microsomes
should be well characterized by using probe substrates.
2.2 May, 2024
Can in vivo induction potential
always be ruled out when the in vitro
induction potential of the
investigational drug is < 2-fold?

An in vitro induction study is considered negative for enzyme induction if
the incubations with the investigational drug at the cut-off concentrations or
higher give rise to no increase or less than 2-fold increase in mRNA
provided that the response of the positive control is ≥ 6-fold.
However, some enzymes (e.g., CYP2C8, CYP2C9, CYP2C19 (sometimes
CYP2B6)) are less inducible, and the increase in mRNA by the positive
control is usually <6-fold. In such a case, the induction potential cannot be
ruled out for an investigational drug that increases CYP enzyme mRNA less
than 2-fold of the vehicle control but more than 20% of the response of the
positive control, along with a concentration-dependent relationship.
Example 1 where induction cannot be ruled out: the investigational drug
increased mRNA dose dependently but maximal increase of 1.8-fold and the
positive control increased mRNA 3-fold, the induction potential of the
investigational drug is 40% that of the positive control (40% = (1.8 mRNA
fold increase – 1)/(3 mRNA fold increase positive control - 1)*100%). Even
though the induction response of the drug is < 2-fold, it is > 20% of the

## Page 6

EMA/CHMP/ICH/227930/2024  Page 6/9

response of the positive control; therefore, further evaluation is
recommended.
Example 2 where induction is unlikely: the investigational drug increased
mRNA dose dependently but maximal increase of 1.8-fold and the positive
control increased mRNA 5.1-fold, the induction potential of the
investigational drug is 19.5% of that of the positive control (19.5% = 1.8
mRNA fold increase – 1)/(5.1 mRNA fold increase positive control -
1)*100%). In this case, no further investigation is needed because the
induction response of the drug is < 2-fold, and it is < 20% of the response
of the positive control. Therefore, the likelihood of induction in vivo is low.
2.3 May, 2024
Why is comparison of polarity
between unchanged drug and
metabolites not a selection criterium
for the metabolite as DDI
precipitant?
Metabolites are often more polar than the unchanged drug. However, a
recent literature report suggests no clear relationship between the polarity
of some metabolites versus parent drug and inhibition potency (Steinbronn
et al., 2021 CPT, 110:452-463). Hence, polarity is not included as a
selection criterium for the metabolite as a DDI precipitant.
2.4 May, 2024
What are the cut-off values for drugs
as precipitant of transporters that
are not listed in Table 1?
For the transporters listed in Table 1, cut-off values have been proposed
based on in vitro-to-in vivo extrapolation (IVIVE) analyses; however, no
IVIVE criteria has been established for other transporters (e.g., OCT1,
MRP2). The organ and the cellular localization of a transporter are
important factors for understanding the relevance of inhibitor
concentrations at the site of the transporter. Therefore, cut-off values for
transporters that are not listed in Table 1 may be deduced from the cut-off
values from transporters listed in Table 1 when the similarity in organ and
the cellular localization of the transporter are taken into consideration.

## Page 7

EMA/CHMP/ICH/227930/2024  Page 7/9

3. Clinical evaluation
# Date of
approval Questions Answers
3.1 May, 2024
What are the unique considerations
regarding DDI evaluations for
determining the effect of an
investigational drug on contraceptive
steroids?
The scientific principles described in ICH M12 are generally applicable for
the drug interaction evaluation of the effect of an investigational drug on
contraceptive steroids. However, the risk of a DDI with contraceptive
steroids for drugs that have teratogenic potential should be considered if
the drug is intended for use in women of childbearing potential. For more
information, refer to regional guidance where available or contact the
relevant regulatory authorities.
4. Reporting and interpreting clinical DDI study results
# Date of
approval Questions Answers
4.1 May, 2024
How is the number of subjects
determined for DDI studies?

As stated in the guideline, the number of subjects included in a DDI study
should be sufficient to provide a reliable estimate of the magnitude and
variability of a potential interaction. When determining the sample size,
factors to consider include the expected variability, the anticipated
magnitude of the interaction, and how the data will be used (e.g., to rule
out an interaction, to quantify an interaction, to support a dose
adjustment). Typically, a clinical DDI study includes around 12-20 subjects,
but larger studies may be needed, for example, when variability is high or
based on the specific objectives of the study.

## Page 8

EMA/CHMP/ICH/227930/2024  Page 8/9

5. Appendix
7.3 In Vitro evaluation of metabolism-based DDIs

# Date of
approval Questions Answers
7.1 May, 2024
Why are sponsors encouraged to
measure concentrations of the parent
drug in the medium on the last day of
incubation with hepatocytes for in vitro
induction studies?
The induction potency might be underestimated when the concentration of
the investigational drug is lower in the incubation medium than the nominal
concentration. Potential causes for the reduced concentrations should be
discussed.
For drugs that are extensively metabolized or transported, a lower
concentration in the medium can be expected because the drug is taken up
by the hepatocytes and/or metabolized. In such a case, a decrease in drug
concentration over time is expected. Since this is reflecting the in vivo
situation, no correction for the lower medium concentration is necessary.
Lower concentrations could also be due to instability of the drug in the
medium. In such case, a decrease in concentration is also expected to
occur in medium without hepatocytes. Correction for instability or more
frequent refreshment of the medium should be considered. As for other in
vitro assays, non-specific binding of the drug to materials or cells and
precipitation could also be reasons for a lower unbound concentration of the
drug in the medium than the nominal concentration. Especially for highly
protein bound drugs, this scenario could be an issue. Sponsors should
discuss the potential impact of the discrepancy on data interpretation and
correct for these non-metabolism/transporter confounders.

## Page 9

EMA/CHMP/ICH/227930/2024  Page 9/9

7.2 May, 2024
Why is characterization of drug
recovery considered important for in
vitro experiments?
For in vitro experiments, good practices include evaluating the recovery of
the investigational drug in the test system and measuring or calculating the
unbound investigational drug concentration in the incubation solution. For
quantitative objectives such as determination of Ki,u or IC50,u, a high
recovery is desirable. On the other hand, for qualitative purposes (e.g.,
substrate yes/no), a lower recovery may not preclude a conclusive answer.
The nature and extent of the effects leading to a decrease of recovery
should be investigated. The following factors should be considered:
- (metabolic) stability of the drug for the duration of study;
- effect of nonspecific binding of the drug to cells/apparatus;
- drug’s solubility.
The potential impact of the discrepancy on data interpretation should be
discussed.
